PMID search 1:  90785
PMID search 2:  9103
PMID search 3:  876678
PMID intersection:  327

1. Rev Med Chil. 1998 Oct;126(10):1173-81.

[Predictors of readmission in patients with congestive heart failure].

[Article in Spanish]

Castro P(1), Bittner V, Villarroel L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Enfermedades Cardiovasculares, Pontificia Universidad Católica
de Chile, Santiago, Chile. pcastro@osler.med.puc.cl

Repeated hospitalizations among patients (pts) with congestive heart failure
(CHF) are common.PURPOSE: This retrospective study was designed to determine
predictors of readmission.
METHODS:
INCLUSION CRITERIA: admitted to University Hospital with a primary diagnosis of
CHF between 10/1/94-9/30/95: lived in Jefferson county.
EXCLUSIONS: cardiac transplant during study period; major comorbidity (e.g.
malignancy, advanced renal failure). Predictors of readmission were determined by
stepwise logistic regression analysis and predictor of time to readmission with
Cox Proportionate Hazards modeling p < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.
RESULTS: Mean age of the 237 pts was 66.5 yrs; 56% women. Mean left ventricular
ejection fraction (LVEF) was 29%; 96% were in NYHA class III/IV. Mean length of
stay was 5 days; 52 pts (22%) had > 1 admission. CHF etiologies: Ischemic (42%), 
hypertensive (37%), idiopathic (12%). Demographic characteristics and insurance
status did not predict readmission risk. Predictors of readmission in the
logistic and Cox models were similar. Increased risk of readmission was
associated with myocardial ischemia (logistic OR 42.7), past NYHA Class III and
IV (OR 32.8), plasmatic creatinine at discharge (OR 1.9) and continued smoking
(OR 3.26). History of CABG was associated with a decreased risk of
rehospitalization (OR 0.12). Beta-blocker use was associated with decreased risk,
but did not achieve statistical significance. ACE-I use (prescribed in 78% of
pts), did not contribute to the model. Diabetes Mellitus and a lower LVEF were
more frequent in the readmitted group, but they did not predict readmission.
CONCLUSION: CHF pts who have evidence of ischemia, advanced symptoms, renal
dysfunction, and who continue to smoke are at increased risk for hospital
readmission. Pts with these characteristics should be identified prior to
hospital discharge and considered for intensive outpatient intervention.

PMID: 10030088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Intern Med J. 2012 Jun;42(6):677-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2011.02562.x.

Risk factors for 30-day readmission in general medical patients admitted from the
emergency department: a single centre study.

Shu CC(1), Lin YF, Hsu NC, Ko WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traumatology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Overcrowding in emergency departments (ED) around the world is an
increasingly serious problem with an adverse impact on both patient flow and
patient outcomes. A significant contributing factor to ED overcrowding is
possibly due to readmission. Risk factors for readmission in patients admitted
from ED are rarely studied, particularly in Asian countries where the length of
stay is reportedly longer.
METHODS: A retrospective study of patients admitted to general medical wards from
the ED of a referral centre in northern Taiwan from November 2009 to April 2010
was conducted. The primary outcome was 30-day hospital readmission and clinical
characteristics were analysed for predictors of readmission.
RESULTS: Of the recruited 2698 patients, 451 (16.7%) were readmitted within 30
days after discharge. Age, gender, marital status and the activities of daily
living (Barthel's score) were not associated with 30-day readmission. Higher
Charlson score ((score 2-4) hazard ratio (HR): 1.42, 95% confidence interval
(CI): 1.07-1.89; (score >4) HR: 1.93, 95% CI: 1.37-2.73), longer hospital stay
((8-14 days) HR: 1.51, 95% CI: 1.17-1.95; (15-28 days) HR: 1.64, 95% CI:
1.22-2.19; (>28 days) HR: 1.97, 95% CI: 1.43-2.71), and presence of underlying
active malignancy (HR: 1.66, 95% CI: 1.27-2.16) and anaemia (HR: 1.26, 95% CI:
1.02-1.55) were independently associated with readmission.
CONCLUSION: Medical patients admitted from the ED of a referral centre have a
30-day readmission rate of 16.7%. Post-discharge care should focus on patients
with higher Charlson score, longer hospitalisation, anaemia and underlying active
malignancy, which are independent predictive factors for 30-day readmission.

© 2011 The Authors. Internal Medicine Journal © 2011 Royal Australasian College
of Physicians.

PMID: 21790921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Geriatr Cardiol. 2006 Jul-Aug;15(4):202-7.

B-type natriuretic peptide predicts postdischarge prognosis in elderly patients
admitted due to cardiogenic pulmonary edema.

Valle R(1), Prevaldi C, D'Eri A, Fontebasso A, Giovinazzo P, Noventa F, Barro S, 
Carbonieri E, Milani L, Aspromonte N.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Unit, Department of Cardiology, Ospedale Civile, San Donà di
Piave, Italy. robertovalle@libero.it

To examine the prognostic role of predischarge B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)
levels in elderly patients admitted to the hospital due to cardiogenic pulmonary 
edema, 203 patients consecutively admitted to the Heart Failure Unit of the
Cardiology Department were retrospectively evaluated. The primary clinical end
point selected was a combination of: 1) deaths; plus 2) readmissions to the
hospital for heart failure in the 6 months after discharge. Thirty-one deaths
(15.3%) and 44 readmissions for heart failure (21.7%) were recorded. Cox
multivariate regression analysis confirmed that BNP cutoff values (identified on 
receiver-operated curve analysis) are the most accurate predictor of events.
Hazard ratios (HRs) increased from the lowest, for BNP < or = 200 pg/mL (HR=1),
through BNP 201-499 pg/mL (HR=2.3200; p=0.0174), to the highest, for BNP > or =
500 pg/mL (HR=3.6233; p=0.0009). This study demonstrates that BNP is useful in
predischarge risk stratification of elderly patients with cardiogenic pulmonary
edema.

PMID: 16849885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JAMA. 2015 Mar 10;313(10):1019-28. doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.1474.

Clinical outcomes at 1 year following transcatheter aortic valve replacement.

Holmes DR Jr(1), Brennan JM(2), Rumsfeld JS(3), Dai D(2), O'Brien SM(2),
Vemulapalli S(2), Edwards FH(4), Carroll J(5), Shahian D(6), Grover F(5), Tuzcu
EM(7), Peterson ED(8), Brindis RG(9), Mack MJ(10); STS/ACC TVT Registry.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (2)Duke Clinical Research Institute,
Durham, North Carolina. (3)Denver VA Medical Center, Denver, Colorado.
(4)University of Florida, Jacksonville. (5)University of Colorado, Denver.
(6)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston. (7)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. 
(8)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina. (9)University of
California, San Francisco. (10)Baylor Scott & White Health, Plano, Texas.

IMPORTANCE: Introducing new medical devices into routine practice raises concerns
because patients and outcomes may differ from those in randomized trials.
OBJECTIVE: To update the previous report of 30-day outcomes and present 1-year
outcomes following transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) in the United
States.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Data from the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons/American College of Cardiology (STS/ACC) Transcatheter Valve Therapies
Registry were linked with patient-specific Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS) administrative claims data. At 299 US hospitals, 12 182 patients
linked with CMS data underwent TAVR procedures performed from November 2011
through June 30, 2013, and the end of the follow-up period was June 30, 2014.
EXPOSURE: Transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: One-year outcomes including mortality, stroke, and
rehospitalization were evaluated using multivariate modeling.
RESULTS: The median age of patients was 84 years and 52% were women, with a
median STS Predicted Risk of Operative Mortality (STS PROM) score of 7.1%.
Following the TAVR procedure, 59.8% were discharged to home and the 30-day
mortality was 7.0% (95% CI, 6.5%-7.4%) (n = 847 deaths). In the first year after 
TAVR, patients were alive and out of the hospital for a median of 353 days
(interquartile range, 312-359 days); 24.4% (n = 2074) of survivors were
rehospitalized once and 12.5% (n = 1525) were rehospitalized twice. By 1 year,
the overall mortality rate was 23.7% (95% CI, 22.8%-24.5%) (n = 2450 deaths), the
stroke rate was 4.1% (95% CI, 3.7%-4.5%) (n = 455 stroke events), and the rate of
the composite outcome of mortality and stroke was 26.0% (25.1%-26.8%) (n = 2719
events). Characteristics significantly associated with 1-year mortality included 
advanced age (hazard ratio [HR] for ≥95 vs <75 years, 1.61 [95% CI, 1.24-2.09];
HR for 85-94 years vs <75 years, 1.35 [95% CI, 1.18-1.55]; and HR for 75-84 years
vs <75 years, 1.23 [95% CI, 1.08-1.41]), male sex (HR, 1.21; 95% CI, 1.12-1.31), 
end-stage renal disease (HR, 1.66; 95% CI, 1.41-1.95), severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (HR, 1.39; 95% CI, 1.25-1.55), nontransfemoral access (HR,
1.37; 95% CI, 1.27-1.48), STS PROM score greater than 15% vs less than 8% (HR,
1.82; 95% CI, 1.60-2.06), and preoperative atrial fibrillation/flutter (HR, 1.37;
95% CI, 1.27-1.48). Compared with men, women had a higher risk of stroke (HR,
1.40; 95% CI, 1.15-1.71).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients undergoing TAVR in US clinical
practice, at 1-year follow-up, overall mortality was 23.7%, the stroke rate was
4.1%, and the rate of the composite outcome of death and stroke was 26.0%. These 
findings should be helpful in discussions with patients undergoing TAVR.

PMID: 25756438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2014 Sep 1;114(5):737-42. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.05.062. Epub 
2014 Jun 19.

Effect of spironolactone on 30-day death and heart failure rehospitalization
(from the COACH Study).

Maisel A(1), Xue Y(2), van Veldhuisen DJ(3), Voors AA(3), Jaarsma T(4), Pang
PS(5), Butler J(6), Pitt B(7), Clopton P(2), de Boer RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
California. Electronic address: amaisel@ucsd.edu. (2)Division of Cardiology,
University of California San Diego, San Diego, California. (3)Department of
Cardiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, The
Netherlands. (4)Division of Health, Activity and Care, Department of Social- and 
Welfare Studies, Linköping University, Norrköping, Sweden. (5)Department of
Emergency Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois. (6)Division of Cardiology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(7)Division of Cardiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Erratum in
    Am J Cardiol. 2014 Nov 15;114(10):1628.

The aim of our study is to investigate the effect of spironolactone on 30-day
outcomes in patients with acute heart failure (AHF) and the association between
treatment and outcomes stratified by biomarkers. We conducted a secondary
analysis of the biomarker substudy of the multicenter COACH (Co-ordinating Study 
Evaluating Outcomes of Advising and Counseling in Heart Failure) trial involving 
534 AHF patients for 30-day mortality and HF rehospitalizations. Spironolactone
therapy was initiated and terminated at the discretion of the treating physician;
30-day outcomes were compared between patients who were treated with
spironolactone and those who were not. Outcomes with spironolactone therapy were 
explored based on N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide, ST2, galectin-3, and
creatinine levels. Spironolactone was prescribed to 297 (55.6%) patients at
discharge (158 new and 139 continued). There were 19 deaths and 30 HF
rehospitalizations among 46 patients by 30 days. Patients discharged on
spironolactone had significantly less 30-day event (hazard ratio 0.538, p =
0.039) after adjustment for multiple risk factors. Initiation of spironolactone
in patients who were not on spironolactone before admission was associated with a
significant reduction in event rate (hazard ratio 0.362, p = 0.027). The survival
benefit of spironolactone was more prominent in patient groups with elevations of
creatinine, N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide, ST2, or galectin-3. In
conclusion, AHF patients who received spironolactone during hospitalization had
significantly fewer 30-day mortality and HF rehospitalizations, especially in
high-risk patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25129066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2010 Sep-Oct;25(5):405-10. doi: 10.1097/JCN.0b013e3181d26011.

Low blood pressure and preserved systolic function in elders with heart failure.

Murphy M(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. mary.murphy@utah.edu

This literature review was performed to evaluate the relationship of systolic
blood pressure (SBP) and preserved systolic function on morbidity and mortality
in individuals older than 65 years with heart failure (HF). When prolonged, high 
SBP, defined as measurements greater than 140 to 160 mm Hg, is associated with
increased risk of developing HF. Medications to lower SBP measurements to Joint
National Committee VII goals of less than 140 mm Hg are often prescribed on the
assumption that treatment guidelines result from a systematic analysis of
clinical trials and efficacy of drug treatments. Lower limits of SBP are less
defined in current guidelines optimizing HF. The electronic databases PubMed,
CINAHL, and Google Scholar are searched for keywords heart failure, prognosis,
preserved systolic function, and blood pressure (BP). Five scholarly research
articles investigated the effects of variables, notably SBP and confirmed
preserved systolic function, on HF, published in the English language between
July 2006 and January 2009. Inclusion criteria were study samples consisting of
individuals 65 years and older referred in this article as elders, with the
diagnosis of HF with a focus on variables measuring SBP and systolic function
when assessing outcomes. Low SBP is a risk factor for adverse outcomes in HF
elders. Additionally, female elders more commonly had preserved systolic
function, but presented with less classic symptoms of HF and were less likely to 
receive cardiology consultation. Considerations for future research are the
inclusion of participants presenting with SBP of less than 110 mm Hg in clinical 
trials and updated evidence-based guidelines, defining acceptable increased
target BP ranges, for sex- and age-adjusted HF patients with preserved systolic
function.

PMID: 20714238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Med Econ. 2008;11(3):397-414. doi: 10.3111/13696990802193081.

Resource utilisation, charges and mortality following hospital inpatient
admission for congestive heart failure among the elderly in the US.

Bharmal M(1), Gemmen E, Zyczynski T, Linnstaedt A, Kenny D, Marelli C.

Author information: 
(1)Quintiles, Inc., Falls Church, VA 22042, USA. Murtuza.Bharmal@Quintiles.com

OBJECTIVES: This study examined resource utilisation, charges and mortality among
congestive heart failure (CHF) patients over the course of the first year
following initial hospital discharge for CHF in the US.
METHODS: The Medicare Standard Analytic Files for the years 1998 through to 2001 
were used for the analysis. The study sample included patients with an inpatient 
hospitalisation between the 1st January 1999 and the 31st December 2000 with a
primary ICD-9 diagnosis code of CHF. Statistical analysis including univariate
and multivariate regression analysis were conducted.
RESULTS: Within 1 year following initial CHF discharge, 50% of patients had at
least one all-cause readmission and 20% had at least one CHF-related readmission.
The mean total charges among all patients was $36,230 (SD $55,086). Of the
patients 20% incurred more than $55,000 in medical charges during the year after 
discharge; 10% incurred charges exceeding $90,000. More than one-half of the CHF 
patients visited the emergency department within 3 months of hospital discharge, 
and within 1 year almost one-third of the CHF patients (31.4%) died.
CONCLUSIONS: The charges, morbidity and mortality associated with CHF patients
are significant. Reducing these risks through more effective disease management
offers the potential for substantial cost savings.

PMID: 19450095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ J. 2008 Dec;72(12):2004-8. Epub 2008 Oct 29.

Inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system prevents re-hospitalization of heart
failure patients with preserved ejection fraction.

Komukai K(1), Yagi H, Ogawa T, Date T, Morimoto S, Kawai M, Hongo K, Taniguchi I,
Yoshimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Jikei University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. komu@jikei.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Approximately half of the patients with chronic heart failure (CHF)
show preserved systolic function, but less is known about CHF with preserved
ejection fraction (EF).
METHODS AND RESULTS: In a retrospective analysis, patients with CHF who had been 
admitted to hospital were divided into 2 groups: reduced EF (EF < or = 40%) and
preserved EF (EF >40%). The rate of preserved EF was 53.5% and those with
preserved EF were older, more likely to be female, and had a lower serum
hemoglobin concentration than those in the reduced EF group. In the multivariate 
analysis, only older age was independently related to CHF with preserved EF. CHF 
patients with preserved EF who were successfully discharged from hospital and
then followed at the outpatient clinic were reviewed and re-hospitalization for
CHF was examined by Cox hazard univariate analysis, which showed that prior CHF
hospitalization, absence of hypertension, and non-use of angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) and/or angiotensin-receptor blocker (ARB) were
predictors. In the multivariate analysis, non-use of ACEI/ARB was the sole
predictor for CHF re-hospitalization.
CONCLUSIONS: CHF patients with preserved EF are older than those with reduced EF 
and use of ACEI/ARB prevents their re-hospitalization.

PMID: 18957786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2006 Jan-Feb;21(1):27-33.

Overweight and obesity in the context of heart failure: implications for practice
and future research.

Evangelista LS(1), Miller PS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, University of California-Los Angeles, 700 Tiverton, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-6918, USA. levangel@ucla.edu

Heart failure (HF) is a major cardiovascular disorder, public health concern, and
growing epidemic that affects approximately 5,000,000 people in the United States
with 550,000 new cases reported annually. The clinical and economic impact of HF 
is associated with high hospitalization and early readmission rates. Recognizing 
factors that contribute to increasing the risk for HF, particularly the
persistent rise in prevalence of overweight and obesity, may be imperative to
reducing the burdens of this poorly prognostic disease process. Overweight and
obesity have been associated with increased morbidity and mortality, and have
incited extensive interest in therapeutic interventions. However, within the last
decade, studies have illustrated the positive effects of overweight and obesity
on survival after the onset of HF, which has prompted a variance of opinion
within the healthcare community. This article reviews data supporting both the
negative and positive effects of overweight and obesity in relationship to HF
with implications for future research, and describes recommendations for practice
as it relates to lifestyle modification through diet, exercise, and
cognitive-behavioral therapy.

PMID: 16407734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ J. 2008 Jul;72(7):1152-7.

Decreased renal function as an independent predictor of re-hospitalization for
congestive heart failure.

Komukai K(1), Ogawa T, Yagi H, Date T, Sakamoto H, Kanzaki Y, Shibayama K,
Hashimoto K, Inada K, Minai K, Ogawa K, Kosuga T, Kawai M, Hongo K, Taniguchi I, 
Yoshimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Jikei University 
School of Medicine, 3-25-8 Nishi-shinbashi, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105-8461, Japan.
komu@jikei.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) are often
re-hospitalized, worsening both their quality of life and prognosis. Although
renal dysfunction reportedly increases the risk of CHF, the association between
renal dysfunction and re-hospitalization for CHF remains unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Patients with CHF and decreased renal function were
reviewed. The estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was calculated with the 
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease equation. Patients with decreased renal
function (estimated GFR on admission <45 ml .min(-1) . 1.73 m(-2)) were
re-hospitalized more frequently than were patients with preserved renal function 
(estimated GFR on admission >or=45). Patients with decreased renal function were 
older and had higher rates of anemia, worsening renal function during
hospitalization, and previous hospitalization for CHF. Independent predictors of 
re-hospitalization for CHF identified with multivariate analysis were age,
previous hospitalization for CHF, decreased renal function, and non-use of an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin-receptor blocker.
CONCLUSIONS: Renal dysfunction is an independent predictor of re-hospitalization 
for CHF, so careful follow-up is needed, even after discharge.

PMID: 18577827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am Heart J. 2008 Oct;156(4):662-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2008.04.030.

Predictors of mortality after discharge in patients hospitalized with heart
failure: an analysis from the Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment 
in Hospitalized Patients with Heart Failure (OPTIMIZE-HF).

O'Connor CM(1), Abraham WT, Albert NM, Clare R, Gattis Stough W, Gheorghiade M,
Greenberg BH, Yancy CW, Young JB, Fonarow GC.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center/Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, NC
27705, USA. oconn002@mc.duke.edu

BACKGROUND: Patients with heart failure (HF) are at high risk for mortality and
rehospitalization in the early period after hospital discharge. We developed
clinical models predictive of short-term clinical outcomes in a broad patient
population discharged after hospitalization for HF.
METHODS: The Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in Hospitalized
Patients with Heart Failure (OPTIMIZE-HF) registry is a comprehensive
hospital-based registry and performance-improvement program for patients
hospitalized with HF. Follow-up data were scheduled to be prospectively collected
at 60 to 90 days postdischarge in a prespecified 10% sample. For the 4,402
patients included in this analysis, 19 prespecified potential predictor variables
were used in a stepwise Cox proportional hazards model for all-cause mortality.
Logistic regression including 45 potential variables was used to model mortality 
or rehospitalization.
RESULTS: The 60- to 90-day postdischarge mortality rate was 8.6% (n = 481), and
29.6% (n = 1,715) were rehospitalized. Factors predicting early postdischarge
mortality include age, serum creatinine, reactive airway disease, liver disease, 
lower systolic blood pressure, lower serum sodium, lower admission weight, and
depression. Use of statins and beta-blockers at discharge was associated with
significantly decreased mortality. The C-index of the model was 0.74. The most
important predictors for the combined end point of death or rehospitalization
were admission serum creatinine, systolic blood pressure, admission hemoglobin,
discharge use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor 
blocker, and pulmonary disease. From this analysis, 8 factors identified to carry
significant risk were selected for use in a point scoring system to predict the
risk of mortality within 60 days after discharge, with a C-index of 0.72.
CONCLUSIONS: A substantial risk of mortality and mortality or rehospitalization
is present in the first 60 to 90 days after discharge from a hospitalization for 
HF. Several factors were identified that signal high-risk patients. Application
of these findings with a simple algorithm can distinguish patients who are low
risk from those at high risk who may benefit from closer monitoring and
aggressive evidence-based treatment.

PMID: 18926148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Vessels. 2012 Nov;27(6):568-75. doi: 10.1007/s00380-011-0185-6. Epub 2011
Sep 10.

Aspirin, clopidogrel, and warfarin use and outcomes in a cohort of 580 patients
discharged after hospitalization for decompensated heart failure.

Kozdağ G(1), Yaymacı M, Ertaş G, Celikyurt U, Sahin T, Kılıç T, Ural D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli University, Gümüşhane, 
Turkey.

The benefits of taking of aspirin, clopidogrel, and warfarin in relation to
cardiovascular mortality and re-hospitalization in chronic heart failure (HF)
patients have been called into question. We examined the outcomes (cardiac
mortality and/or HF re-hospitalization) in patients discharged from our hospital 
between January 2003 and July 2009 after hospitalization for chronic
decompensated HF. Of 580 HF patients (mean age, 63 ± 13 years; mean ejection
fraction, 26 ± 9%, 63% with coronary disease and 37% without coronary disease),
207 patients (36%) died due to cardiovascular reasons, and 313 (54%) required HF 
re-hospitalization for decompensated HF during a 39 ± 14 month follow-up period. 
101 (17%) patients were taking clopidogrel during enrollment in the study. When
comparing patients who were on clopidogrel treatment with those who were not,
clopidogrel was found to have a beneficial effect on cardiac mortality (27 vs.
38%, P = 0.04). In conclusion, in this observational prospective study, patients 
who used clopidogrel showed decreased cardiac mortality [HR, 0.566 (95% CI
0.332-0.964), P = 0.036] compared to patients who did not take clopidogrel.
Clopidogrel had a beneficial effect on the survival of chronic HF patients in the
long term.

PMID: 21909806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Chest. 1987 Nov;92(5):800-3.

Determinants of discharge following coronary artery bypass graft surgery.

Lazar HL(1), Wilcox K, McCormick JR, Roberts AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Boston University Medical Center.

The optimal time for discharge following coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
surgery is uncertain and varies among institutions. This study was undertaken to 
determine what factors may discriminate between early and late discharge
following surgery. In 177 consecutive patients undergoing isolated CABG
procedures, three groups were formed retrospectively according to the number of
days hospitalized post CABG: group 1, less than or equal to 8; group 2, 9 to 11; 
group 3, greater than or equal to 12. Parameters found to discriminate between
group 1 and group 3 (p less than .05; chi square analysis) included female sex,
unstable angina, congestive heart failure (CHF), age greater than or equal to 65 
years, and the development of major postoperative complications. Angina class,
prior myocardial infarction, extent of coronary artery disease, aortic
cross-clamp time, number of bypass grafts, ejection fraction less than 40
percent, or "minor" postoperative complications were not different among groups. 
Patients discharged less than or equal to 8 days following CABG had no increase
in return visits or readmissions less than 60 days post CABG. We conclude that
while certain patients can be safely discharged less than or equal to 8 days post
CABG, patients who are female, greater than or equal to 65 years, have unstable
angina, CHF, or a major postoperative complication are likely to be hospitalized 
longer.

PMID: 3499292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2014 Apr 11;111(15):264-70. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2014.0264.

Case management program for patients with chronic heart failure: effectiveness in
terms of mortality, hospital admissions and costs.

Hendricks V(1), Schmidt S, Vogt A, Gysan D, Latz V, Schwang I, Griebenow R,
Riedel R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Health-Economics & Health-Care Research, University of Applied
Sciences, Cologne, Department of Internal Medicine, Heidelberg University
Hospital at the Ruprecht-Karls-University, Cardiology and Angiology Center,
Cologne, pronova BKK, Statutory Health Insurance, Cologne, Department of
Cardiology, St. Marien-Hospital Hamm (teaching hospital of the University of
Münster), Department of Cardiology, Angiology and Diabetology, Cologne-Merheim
Hospital, Kliniken der Stadt Köln, Cologne.

Comment in
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2014 Oct 3;111(40):680-1.
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2014 Oct 3;111(40):680.
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2014 Oct 3;111(40):681.

BACKGROUND: At 360 000 cases annually, heart failure is the most common main
diagnosis in adults in German hospitals. Treating heart failure is expensive.
This study tested whether patients in the case management program (CMP)
"CorBene--Better Care for Patients With Heart Failure" have a lower mortality
rate and lower hospital admission and readmission rates than patients receiving
regular management.
METHOD: Routine data from a large German statutory health insurance company were 
analyzed. After propensity score matching, a total of 1202 patients (intervention
group versus control group) were studied in relation to the endpoint "hospital
admission and readmission rate" and the variables "annual physician contact
rate," "mortality," and "inpatient treatment costs."
RESULTS: The intervention group showed a lower rate of hospital
admission/readmission (6.2%/18.9% versus 16.6%/36.0%; p<0.0001 / p = 0.041).
Mortality rates did not differ significantly (5.0% versus 6.7%; p = 0.217).
Analysis of hospital admission data showed no significant differences between the
groups in terms of length of hospital stay or costs for heart failure-related
treatment per hospital stay. However, the average annual costs for inpatient
treatment in the CMP group, at €222.22 per patient, were 67.5% lower than the
equivalent costs in the control group (€683.88) (p<0.0001).
CONCLUSION: Fewer patients in the intervention group were admitted and readmitted
to hospital, and lower inpatient treatment costs were identified. The physician
contact rate was higher than in the control group.

PMCID: PMC4004935
PMID: 24776611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2008 Sep;1(5):595-601. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2008.06.005.

Comparison of hand-carried ultrasound assessment of the inferior vena cava and
N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide for predicting readmission after
hospitalization for acute decompensated heart failure.

Goonewardena SN(1), Gemignani A, Ronan A, Vasaiwala S, Blair J, Brennan JM, Shah 
DP, Spencer KT.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago Hospitals, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Comment in
    JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2008 Sep;1(5):602-4.

OBJECTIVES: We sought to compare the value of serial assessment with hand-carried
ultrasound (HCU) of the inferior vena cava (IVC) with brain natriuretic peptide
(BNP) to identify patients with acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF) who will
be readmitted or seek emergency department treatment after hospital discharge.
BACKGROUND: Congestive heart failure (CHF) is a leading cause for hospitalization
and, once hospitalized, patients with CHF frequently are readmitted. To date, no 
reliable index exists that can be used to predict whether patients with ADHF can 
be discharged with low readmission likelihood.
METHODS: A total of 75 patients who were admitted with a primary diagnosis of
ADHF were followed. All patients were assessed at admission and discharge with
the use of routine clinical evaluation, BNP measurement, and HCU evaluation of
the IVC by physicians with limited training in ultrasound.
RESULTS: During the 30-day follow-up, 31 patients were rehospitalized or
presented to the emergency department. Patients who were subsequently readmitted 
could not be differentiated from those who were not readmitted by their
demographics, comorbidities, vital signs, presence of symptoms/signs suggestive
of persistent congestion, hospital length of stay, or net volume removal. Routine
laboratory tests, including assessment of renal function, also failed to predict 
readmission with the exception of serum sodium. Although admission BNP was
similar in patients readmitted and not readmitted, pre-discharge log-transformed 
BNP was greater in patients who subsequently were readmitted. Patients who
required repeat hospitalization had a larger IVC size on admission as well as at 
discharge. In addition, patients who were readmitted had persistently plethoric
IVCs with lower IVC collapsibility indexes. At discharge, only serum sodium,
log-transformed BNP, IVC size, and collapsibility were statistically significant 
predictors of readmission.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that, once hospitalized, patients with CHF
frequently are readmitted. Bedside evaluation of the IVC with a HCU device at the
time of admission and discharge, as well as pre-discharge BNP, identified
patients admitted with ADHF who were more likely to be readmitted to the
hospital.

PMID: 19356487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Med. 2012 Feb;125(2):209.e9-209.e15. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2011.06.014.

The impact of prior heart failure hospitalizations on long-term mortality differs
by baseline risk of death.

Kommuri NV(1), Koelling TM, Hummel SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Detroit Medical Center: Sinai-Grace Hospital,
MI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hospitalizations for decompensated heart failure (HF) are thought to 
increase long-term mortality. However, previous reports focus on newly
hospitalized HF patients or clinical trial populations and do not always adjust
for baseline mortality risk. We hypothesized that the number of HF
hospitalizations within the prior 12 months would improve overall mortality risk 
stratification, particularly in otherwise "low-risk" HF inpatients.
METHODS: We studied 2221 HF patients admitted to 14 Michigan community hospitals 
during 2002-2004. We estimated 1-year mortality using the multivariable (Enhanced
Feedback For Effective Cardiac Treatment [EFFECT]) model and classified patients 
as low (EFFECT <90), moderate (90-120), and high risk (>120). We used logistic
regression and stratified Cox proportional hazard modeling to explore the overall
EFFECT model performance and the influence of HF hospitalizations within the
prior 12 months on mortality risk.
RESULTS: The EFFECT model adequately predicted and stratified for 1-year
mortality (odds ratio 1.35 [95% confidence interval (CI), 1.30-1.40] per 10
points, P <.001, C-statistic 0.698), with low-, moderate-, and high-risk group
mortality 18%, 35%, and 58%, respectively. The number of prior HF
hospitalizations only modestly improved overall discrimination (C-statistic
0.704, P=.04). However, in low-risk patients the number of prior HF
hospitalizations progressively increased the hazard for 1-year mortality (none:
mortality 13%; 1: mortality 20%, hazard ratio [HR] 1.50 (95% CI, 0.86-2.60),
P=.15; 2 or 3: mortality 27%, HR 2.24 (95% CI, 1.39-3.60); P=.001; 4 or more:
mortality 31%, HR 2.80 (95% CI, 1.70-4.63); P <.001; P <.001 for trend). There
was no consistent relationship between prior HF hospitalizations and 1-year
mortality in moderate- or high-risk HF patients.
CONCLUSION: In otherwise "low-risk" HF inpatients, a history of 2 or more HF
hospitalizations within the prior 12 months markedly increases 1-year mortality
risk. This easily obtained information could help allocate specialized HF
resources to the subset of "low-risk" patients most likely to benefit.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22269626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Can J Cardiol. 2004 Oct;20(12):1205-11.

Multidisciplinary outpatient congestive heart failure clinic: impact on hospital 
admissions and emergency room visits.

Martineau P(1), Frenette M, Blais L, Sauvé C.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal and Faculté de Pharmacie, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Life-saving drugs, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
and beta-blockers, are frequently underused and underdosed in patients with heart
failure. Specialized clinics have been shown to provide additional benefits.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the impact of a multidisciplinary outpatient heart
failure clinic on the frequency of cardiovascular readmissions and emergency room
(ER) visits, length of inpatient and ER stays, and New York Heart Association
(NYHA) class.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review study comprising 72 patients who had two or
more visits to a heart failure clinic between December 1, 1998, and August 31,
1999, was performed. The number of readmissions and ER visits, and the NYHA class
were recorded during the six-month period before and after the first visit to the
clinic.
RESULTS: Most subjects were in NYHA class III or IV (71% and 21%, respectively), 
and the mean ejection fraction was 31%. The post- versus preintervention relative
risk of readmission was 0.43 (95% CI 0.25 to 0.72). The total number of inpatient
days decreased by 54% (95% CI 44% to 62%). The post- versus preintervention
relative risk of an ER visit was 0.29 (95% CI 0.19 to 0.45). The number of ER
days decreased by 60% (95% CI 41% to 73%). NYHA functional class significantly
improved, with most subjects ending the six-month postintervention period in
class I or II (33% and 49%, respectively; P=0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This multidisciplinary heart failure clinic significantly decreased 
the risk of cardiovascular readmissions and subsequent ER visits. It led to
improvement in NYHA class and to a decrease in the number of days spent in the
hospital and in the ER.

PMID: 15494772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. EuroIntervention. 2014;9(12):1407-17. doi: 10.4244/EIJV9I12A238.

Failure of acute procedural success predicts adverse outcome after percutaneous
edge-to-edge mitral valve repair with MitraClip.

Puls M(1), Tichelbäcker T, Bleckmann A, Hünlich M, von der Ehe K, Beuthner BE,
Rüter K, Beißbarth T, Seipelt R, Schöndube F, Hasenfuß G, Schillinger W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Centre Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany.

AIMS: MitraClip implantation is evolving as a potential alternative treatment to 
conventional surgery in high-risk patients with significant mitral regurgitation 
(MR). However, outcome predictors are under-investigated. The aim of this study
was to identify predictors of midterm mortality and heart failure
rehospitalisation after percutaneous mitral valve repair with MitraClip.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 150 consecutive patients were followed for a
median of 463 days. Survival analyses were performed for baseline
characteristics, risk scores and failure of acute procedural success (APS)
defined as persisting MR grade 3+ or 4+. Univariate significant risk stratifiers 
were tested in multivariate analyses using a Cox proportional hazards model.
Overall survival was 96% at 30 days, 79.5% at 12 months, and 62% at two years.
Multivariate analysis identified APS failure (HR 2.13, p=0.02), NYHA Class IV at 
baseline (HR 2.11, p=0.01) and STS score ≥12 (HR 2.20, p<0.0001) as significant
independent predictors of all-cause mortality, and APS failure (HR 2.31, p=0.01) 
and NYHA Class IV at baseline (HR 1.89, p=0.03) as significant independent
predictors of heart failure rehospitalisation. Furthermore, a post-procedural
significant decrease in hospitalisation rate could only be observed after
successful interventions (0.89±1.07 per year before vs. 0.54±0.96 after
implantation, p=0.01). Patients with severely dilated and overloaded ventricles
who did not meet EVEREST II eligibility criteria were at higher risk of APS
failure.
CONCLUSIONS: The failure of acute procedural success proved to have the most
important impact on outcome after MitraClip implantation.

PMID: 24972141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Chest. 2007 Jun;131(6):1838-43. Epub 2007 Mar 30.

Acute pulmonary embolism is an independent predictor of adverse events in severe 
decompensated heart failure patients.

Darze ES(1), Latado AL, Guimarães AG, Guedes RA, Santos AB, de Moura SS, Passos
LC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Federal University of Bahia, Brasil. esdarze@ufba.br

BACKGROUND: Congestive heart failure (CHF) is a well-recognized risk factor for
venous thromboembolism (VTE) and is associated with higher mortality in patients 
with an acute pulmonary embolism (PE). There are very few data on how acute PE
affects the clinical course of patients with heart failure. The purpose of this
study was to determine the impact of an acute PE on the short-term prognosis of
patients hospitalized for decompensated CHF.
METHODS: This was a prospective cohort study of 198 patients admitted to a
coronary care unit between July 2001 and March 2003 with severe decompensated
CHF. The primary outcome measure was death or rehospitalization at 3 months.
RESULTS: PE was confirmed in 18 of 198 patients enrolled (9.1%). The groups with 
and without PE were comparable with regards to demographics, the prevalence of
comorbid conditions, and severity of CHF (p > 0.05). The prevalence of cancer (p 
= 0.0001), previous VTE (p = 0.003), and right ventricular overload (p = 0.006)
was higher in the PE group. The presence of PE was also associated with a longer 
hospital stay (37.5 +/- 71.6 days vs 15.4 +/- 15.0 days, p = 0.001) [mean +/- SD]
and a higher incidence of death or rehospitalization at 3 months (72.2% vs 43.9%,
p = 0.02). In a multiple logistic regression analysis, PE remained an independent
predictor of death or rehospitalization at 3 months (odds ratio, 4.0; 95%
confidence interval, 1.1 to 15.1; p = 0.038).
CONCLUSIONS: Acute PE commonly complicates the hospital course of patients with
severe CHF, increasing the length of hospital stay and the chance of death or
rehospitalization at 3 months.

PMID: 17400665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur Heart J. 2002 Apr;23(8):650-7.

Substantial between-hospital variation in outcome following first emergency
admission for heart failure.

Stewart S(1), Demers C, Murdoch DR, McIntyre K, MacLeod ME, Kendrick S, Capewell 
S, McMurray JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Initiative in Heart Failure, University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
Scotland, U.K.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2002 Apr;23(8):597-9.

BACKGROUND: Following hospitalization with a range of cardiovascular disorders,
substantial variation has been noted in clinical outcome, both between and within
countries.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the variation, between hospitals, in the clinical outcomes
of death and readmission following hospitalization with heart failure in
Scotland. Setting All 29 acute hospitals in Scotland with more than 200 beds.
PATIENTS: All 31 452 patients discharged from these hospitals between January
1990 and December 1995 with a first-ever, primary, diagnosis at discharge/death
of heart failure.
ANALYSIS: An analysis of the Scottish database of discharge summaries linking
index admissions with subsequent admissions and deaths. Death rates and
readmission rates were adjusted for baseline age, co-morbidity and socio-economic
status and were calculated at different time periods (inpatient, 30 days, 1
year). Rates were calculated separately for large teaching hospitals (n=6,
category A), large general hospitals with specialist units (n=8, category B) and 
medium sized general hospitals with limited specialist units (n=15 category C).
RESULTS: A total of 31 452 patients were discharged between 1990-1995 - 10 219
(33%), 9735 (31%) and 11 498 (37%) to category A, B and C hospitals,
respectively. The national, average, inpatient case fatality rate was 15.3%,
ranging, in individual hospitals, from the lowest rate of 8.5% to the highest
rate of 23.4%. The average 1 year case fatality rate was 42.4%, ranging between
35.3% and 50.8%. A similar two- to threefold variation was found in hospital
readmission rates - thus the average 30 day readmission rate was 5.3% (lowest
3.3%, highest 7.3%). This variation, in both case-fatality and readmission rates,
was apparent within all three groups of hospitals and persisted after adjustment 
for the baseline factors outlined above.
CONCLUSIONS: A patient admitted to one Scottish hospital with heart failure may
be two to three times more likely to die or be readmitted, both in the short and 
longer term, compared to a patient admitted to another hospital. Although we may 
not have accounted for some sources of variation, it is both surprising and
disturbing that large, statistically significant, differences in adjusted death
and readmission rates can apparently exist for such an important condition in a
relatively small country with generally homogenous health care provision.
Further, detailed investigation of this apparent variation is required.

Copyright 2002 The European Society of Cardiology.

PMID: 11969280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014 May;89(5):623-30. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2013.12.018. Epub
2014 Mar 29.

Impact of prior admissions on 30-day readmissions in medicare heart failure
inpatients.

Hummel SL(1), Katrapati P(2), Gillespie BW(3), Defranco AC(4), Koelling TM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;
Section of Cardiology, Ann Arbor Veteran's Affairs Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI.
Electronic address: scothumm@med.umich.edu. (2)Division of Cardiovascular
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. (3)Department of Biostatistics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. (4)Aurora Health Care, Milwaukee, WI.

OBJECTIVE: To determine how all-cause hospitalizations within 12 months preceding
an index heart failure (HF) hospitalization affect risk stratification for 30-day
all-cause readmission.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Early readmission of inpatients with HF is challenging to
predict, yet this outcome is used to compare hospital performance and guide
reimbursement. Most risk models do not consider the potentially important
variable of prior admissions. We analyzed Medicare inpatients with HF aged 66
years or older admitted to 14 Michigan community hospitals from October 1, 2002, 
to March 31, 2003, and from January 1 to June 30, 2004. Clinical data were
obtained from admission charts, hospitalization dates from Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS) claims, and mortality dates from the Social Security
Death Index. We used mixed-effects logistic regression and reclassification
indices to evaluate the ability of a CMS chart-based readmission risk model,
prior admissions, and their combination to predict 30-day readmission in
survivors of the index HF hospitalization.
RESULTS: Of 1807 patients, 43 (2.4%) died during the index admission; 476 of 1764
survivors (27%) were readmitted 30 or fewer days after discharge. Adjusted for
the CMS readmission model, prior admissions significantly increased the odds of
30-day readmission (1 vs 0: odds ratio, 4.67; 95% CI, 3.37-6.46; ≥2 vs 0: odds
ratio, 6.49; 95% CI, 4.93-8.55; both P<.001), improved model discrimination (c
statistic, 0.61-0.74, P<.001), and reclassified many patients (net
reclassification index, 0.40; integrated discrimination index, 0.12).
CONCLUSION: In Medicare inpatients with HF, prior all-cause admissions strongly
increase all-cause readmission risk and markedly improve risk stratification for 
30-day readmission.

Copyright © 2014 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4017659
PMID: 24684780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2008 Sep;1(5):602-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2008.06.004.

Empowering physical examination: the "laying on" of ultrasound.

Kimura BJ, Demaria AN.

Comment on
    JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2008 Sep;1(5):595-601.

PMID: 19356488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2012 May 15;109(10):1482-6. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.01.362.
Epub 2012 Feb 28.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) and risk of readmissions in patients with heart
failure.

Thakar CV(1), Parikh PJ, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati VA Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. charuhas.thakar@va.gov

Heart failure (HF) contributes to a high rate of hospitalizations. Acute kidney
injury (AKI), with or without chronic kidney disease (CKD), is a common
complication in patients with HF. The link between AKI and the risk for
readmission for repeat episodes of HF is not well studied. In this study, 6,535
patients discharged with primary diagnoses of HF derived from a statewide
inpatient database were examined. The association between AKI, with and without
CKD, and risk for 30-day readmission with HF was assessed. Logistic regression
was used to test the relations between predictor variables and outcomes. The mean
age was 73.8 ± 14.6 years, and 51% of patients (n = 3,351) were women. AKI
occurred in 6.5% of patients during the index hospitalization, whereas 16% had
CKD. Nine hundred seventy-seven patients (15%) required readmission within 30
days for HF. Index hospital mortality was 1.7% in those without AKI or CKD
compared to 11% and 13% in those with AKI without and with CKD, respectively (p
<0.0001). Patients with AKI had a 30-day readmission rate of 21%, compared to 14%
in those without AKI (p <0.0001). On multivariate analysis, AKI without CKD was
associated with the highest risk for readmission (odds ratio 1.81, 95% confidence
interval 1.35 to 2.39) compared to those with neither of the 2 diagnoses. In
conclusion, patients with HF who have AKI experience a high rate of 30-day
readmission for repeat episodes of HF. Reducing the risk for AKI, and follow-up
monitoring after AKI, may improve care and reduce health care costs in patients
with HF.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22381163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2011 May;4(3):241-3. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.962258.

Heart failure patients in skilled nursing facilities: evidence needed.

Pressler SJ.

Comment on
    Circ Heart Fail. 2011 May;4(3):293-300.

PMID: 21586734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Lung. 2008 Jan-Feb;37(1):36-45. doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2007.04.004.

Telehome monitoring in patients with cardiac disease who are at high risk of
readmission.

Woodend AK(1), Sherrard H, Fraser M, Stuewe L, Cheung T, Struthers C.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Nursing, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario.

Comment in
    Evid Based Nurs. 2008 Jul;11(3):86.

Patients with chronic conditions are heavy users of the health care system. There
are opportunities for significant savings and improvements to patient care if
patients can be maintained in their homes. A randomized control trial tested the 
impact of 3 months of telehome monitoring on hospital readmission, quality of
life, and functional status in patients with heart failure or angina. The
intervention consisted of video conferencing and phone line transmission of
weight, blood pressure, and electrocardiograms. Telehome monitoring significantly
reduced the number of hospital readmissions and days spent in the hospital for
patients with angina and improved quality of life and functional status in
patients with heart failure or angina. Patients found the technology easy to use 
and expressed high levels of satisfaction. Telehealth technologies are a viable
means of providing home monitoring to patients with heart disease at high risk of
hospital readmission to improve their self-care abilities.

PMID: 18206525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2013 Mar;6(2):240-5. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.112.969246.
Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Markers of decongestion, dyspnea relief, and clinical outcomes among patients
hospitalized with acute heart failure.

Kociol RD(1), McNulty SE, Hernandez AF, Lee KL, Redfield MM, Tracy RP, Braunwald 
E, O'Connor CM, Felker GM; NHLBI Heart Failure Network Steering Committee and
Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, NC, USA. rkociol@bidmc.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Congestion is a primary driver of symptoms in patients with acute
heart failure, and relief of congestion is a critical goal of therapy. Monitoring
of response to therapy through the assessment of daily weights and net fluid loss
is the current standard of care, yet the relationship between commonly used
markers of decongestion and both patient reported symptom relief and clinical
outcomes are unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed a retrospective analysis of the randomized
clinical trial, diuretic optimization strategy evaluation in acute heart failure 
(DOSE-AHF), enrolling patients hospitalized with a diagnosis of acute
decompensated heart failure. We assessed the relationship among 3 markers of
decongestion at 72 hours-weight loss, net fluid loss, and percent reduction in
serum N terminal B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level-and relief of
symptoms as defined by the dyspnea visual analog scale area under the curve. We
also determined the relationship between each marker of decongestion and 60-day
clinical outcomes defined as time to death, first rehospitalization or emergency 
department visit. Mean age was 66 years, mean ejection fraction was 35%, and 27% 
had ejection fraction ≥50%. Of the 3 measures of decongestion assessed, only
percent reduction in NT-proBNP was significantly associated with symptom relief
(r=0.13; P=0.04). There was no correlation between either weight loss or net
fluid loss and symptom relief, (r=0.04; P=0.54 and r=0.07; P=0.27, respectively).
Favorable changes in each of the 3 markers of decongestion were associated with
improvement in time to death, rehospitalization, or emergency department visit at
60 days (weight: hazard ratio, 0.91; 95% confidence interval, 0.85-0.97 per 4
lbs; weight lost; fluid hazard ratio, 0.94; 95% confidence interval, 0.90-0.99
per 1000 mL fluid loss; NT-proBNP hazard ratio, 0.95; 95% confidence interval,
0.91-0.99 per 10% reduction). These associations were unchanged after
multivariable adjustment with the exception that percent reduction in NT-proBNP
was no longer a significant predictor (hazard ratio, 0.97; 95% confidence
interval, 0.93-1.02). The rates of death, HF hospitalization, or emergency
department visit at 60 days for patients with 0, 1, 2, and 3 markers of
decongestion (above the median) were 67%, 64%, 46%, and 38%, respectively (log
rank P value=0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Weight loss, fluid loss, and NT-proBNP reduction at 72 hours are
poorly correlated with dyspnea relief. However, favorable improvements in each of
the 3 markers were associated with improved clinical outcomes at 60 days. These
data suggest the need for ongoing research to understand the relationships among 
symptom relief, congestion, and outcomes in patients with acute decompensated
heart failure.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: URL: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. UNIQUE
IDENTIFIER: NCT00577135.

PMCID: PMC3865520
PMID: 23250981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. N Engl J Med. 2013 Mar 14;368(11):1019-26. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1200657.

Long-term outcomes in elderly survivors of in-hospital cardiac arrest.

Chan PS(1), Nallamothu BK, Krumholz HM, Spertus JA, Li Y, Hammill BG, Curtis LH; 
American Heart Association Get with the Guidelines–Resuscitation Investigators.

Collaborators: Chan PS, Berg RA, Allen E, Donnino MW, Edelson DP, Duncan K, Eigel
B, Gent L, Faillace RT, Geocadin RG, Hunt EA, Knight L, LaBresh K, Mancini ME,
Nadkarni VM, Nichol G, Warren SA, Peberdy MA, Ornato JP, Sasson C, Smyth M.

Author information: 
(1)Saint Luke's Mid America Heart Institute, Kansas City, MO 64111, USA.
pchan@cc-pc.com

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Jun 20;368(25):2438-9.
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Jun 20;368(25):2438.
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Jun 20;368(25):2437-8.
    Evid Based Med. 2013 Dec;18(6):227-8.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the long-term outcomes in elderly survivors of 
in-hospital cardiac arrest. We determined rates of long-term survival and
readmission among survivors of in-hospital cardiac arrest and examined whether
these outcomes differed according to demographic characteristics and neurologic
status at discharge.
METHODS: We linked data from a national registry of inpatient cardiac arrests
with Medicare files and identified 6972 adults, 65 years of age or older, who
were discharged from the hospital after surviving an in-hospital cardiac arrest
between 2000 and 2008. Predictors of 1-year survival and of readmission to the
hospital were examined.
RESULTS: One year after hospital discharge, 58.5% of the patients were alive, and
34.4% had not been readmitted to the hospital. The risk-adjusted rate of 1-year
survival was lower among older patients than among younger patients (63.7%,
58.6%, and 49.7% among patients 65 to 74, 75 to 84, and ≥85 years of age,
respectively; P<0.001), among men than among women (58.6% vs. 60.9%, P=0.03), and
among black patients than among white patients (52.5% vs. 60.4%, P=0.001). The
risk-adjusted rate of 1-year survival was 72.8% among patients with mild or no
neurologic disability at discharge, as compared with 61.1% among patients with
moderate neurologic disability, 42.2% among those with severe neurologic
disability, and 10.2% among those in a coma or vegetative state (P<0.001 for all 
comparisons). Moreover, 1-year readmission rates were higher among patients who
were black, those who were women, and those who had substantial neurologic
disability (P<0.05 for all comparisons). These differences in survival and
readmission rates persisted at 2 years. At 3 years, the rate of survival among
survivors of in-hospital cardiac arrest was similar to that of patients who had
been hospitalized with heart failure and were discharged alive (43.5% and 44.9%, 
respectively; risk ratio, 0.98; 95% confidence interval, 0.95 to 1.02; P=0.35).
CONCLUSIONS: Among elderly survivors of in-hospital cardiac arrest, nearly 60%
were alive at 1 year, and the rate of 3-year survival was similar to that among
patients with heart failure. Survival and readmission rates differed according to
the demographic characteristics of the patients and neurologic status at
discharge. (Funded by the American Heart Association and the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute.).

PMCID: PMC3652256
PMID: 23484828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart. 1997 May;77(5):437-42.

Predictors of hospital readmission two years after coronary artery bypass
grafting.

Herlitz J(1), Albertsson P, Brandrup-Wognsen G, Emanuelsson H, Haglid M, Hartford
M, Hjalmarson A, Karlson BW, Karlsson T, Sandén W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Sahlgrenaka University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the clinical factors before, and in association with,
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) that increase the risk of readmission to
hospital in the first two years after surgery.
PATIENTS: All patients in western Sweden who had CABG without simultaneous valve 
surgery between 1 June 1988 and 1 June 1991.
METHODS: All patients who were readmitted to hospital were evaluated by postal
inquiry and hospital records.
RESULTS: A total of 2121 patients were operated on, of whom 2037 were discharged 
from hospital. Information regarding readmission was missing in four patients,
leaving 2033 patients; 44% were readmitted to hospital. The most common reasons
for readmission were angina pectoris and congestive heart failure. There were 12 
independent significant predictors for readmission: clinical history (a previous 
history of either congestive heart failure or myocardial infarction, or CABG);
acute operation; postoperative complications (time in intensive care unit greater
than two days, neurological complications); clinical findings four to seven days 
after the operation (arrhythmia, systolic murmur equivalent to mitral
regurgitation); medication four to seven days after the operation (antidiabetics,
diuretics for heart failure, other antiarrhythmics (other than beta blockers,
calcium antagonists, and digitalis), and lack of treatment with aspirin).
CONCLUSION: 44% of patients were readmitted to hospital two years after CABG. The
most common reasons for readmission were angina pectoris and congestive heart
failure. Four clinical markers predicted readmission: clinical history; acute
operation status; postoperative complications; and clinical findings and
medication four to seven days after operation.

PMCID: PMC484766
PMID: 9196414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2014 May 27;14:41. doi: 10.1186/1472-6947-14-41.

A three-step approach for the derivation and validation of high-performing
predictive models using an operational dataset: congestive heart failure
readmission case study.

AbdelRahman SE(1), Zhang M, Bray BE, Kawamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah, 615 Arapeen Way,
Suite 208, Salt Lake City, UT 84092, USA. samir.abdelrahman@utah.edu.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to propose an analytical approach to
develop high-performing predictive models for congestive heart failure (CHF)
readmission using an operational dataset with incomplete records and changing
data over time.
METHODS: Our analytical approach involves three steps: pre-processing, systematic
model development, and risk factor analysis. For pre-processing, variables that
were absent in >50% of records were removed. Moreover, the dataset was divided
into a validation dataset and derivation datasets which were separated into three
temporal subsets based on changes to the data over time. For systematic model
development, using the different temporal datasets and the remaining explanatory 
variables, the models were developed by combining the use of various (i)
statistical analyses to explore the relationships between the validation and the 
derivation datasets; (ii) adjustment methods for handling missing values; (iii)
classifiers; (iv) feature selection methods; and (iv) discretization methods. We 
then selected the best derivation dataset and the models with the highest
predictive performance. For risk factor analysis, factors in the
highest-performing predictive models were analyzed and ranked using (i)
statistical analyses of the best derivation dataset, (ii) feature rankers, and
(iii) a newly developed algorithm to categorize risk factors as being strong,
regular, or weak.
RESULTS: The analysis dataset consisted of 2,787 CHF hospitalizations at
University of Utah Health Care from January 2003 to June 2013. In this study, we 
used the complete-case analysis and mean-based imputation adjustment methods; the
wrapper subset feature selection method; and four ranking strategies based on
information gain, gain ratio, symmetrical uncertainty, and wrapper subset feature
evaluators. The best-performing models resulted from the use of a complete-case
analysis derivation dataset combined with the Class-Attribute Contingency
Coefficient discretization method and a voting classifier which averaged the
results of multi-nominal logistic regression and voting feature intervals
classifiers. Of 42 final model risk factors, discharge disposition, discretized
age, and indicators of anemia were the most significant. This model achieved a
c-statistic of 86.8%.
CONCLUSION: The proposed three-step analytical approach enhanced predictive model
performance for CHF readmissions. It could potentially be leveraged to improve
predictive model performance in other areas of clinical medicine.

PMCID: PMC4074427
PMID: 24886637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2001 Sep 1;88(5):530-3.

Mortality and readmission of hospitalized patients with congestive heart failure 
and preserved versus depressed systolic function.

Tsutsui H(1), Tsuchihashi M, Takeshita A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. prehiro@cardiol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) and preserved systolic function are 
very common. Despite the high prevalence of this syndrome, very little
information is known regarding its mortality and morbidity (e.g., readmission),
or the efficacy of drugs. The purpose of this study was to compare the clinical
characteristics and prognosis among consecutively hospitalized patients with CHF 
and preserved versus depressed left ventricular systolic function. Patients with 
severe aortic or mitral valve disease were excluded from the study. Patients were
categorized based on the values of ejection fraction (EF) as having "preserved"
(EF>50%), "intermediate" (EF 40% to 50%), or "depressed" (EF<40%) systolic
function. Clinical characteristics as well as mortality and hospital readmission 
rates during 2.4 years of follow-up were recorded for each patient. Sixty-one
patients (35%) had preserved systolic function, 73 (43%) had depressed function, 
and 38 (22%) had intermediate function. Patients with preserved systolic function
were more often women and had a higher prevalence of left ventricular hypertrophy
(all p <0.05). At follow-up, cumulative survival probabilities were similar
between patients with preserved systolic function and those with systolic
dysfunction (p = 0.84). Readmission rates were also comparable between preserved 
and depressed systolic function (36% vs 48%; p = NS). The prognosis of CHF
patients with preserved systolic function was similar to those with systolic
dysfunction. In light of these findings, effective therapeutic strategy for this 
subset of patients is needed.

PMID: 11524063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Int J Health Care Finance Econ. 2004 Sep;4(3):211-30.

Changes in hospital quality after conversion in ownership status.

Farsi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Economics, University of Lugano, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, ETH Zentrum, WEC, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland. farsi@cepe.mavt.ethz.ch

This paper examines the effects of conversions between For-Profit and
Not-For-Profit forms on quality of medical care in California hospitals. The
sample includes elderly patients treated in California's private hospitals from
1990 to 1998 for Acute Myocardial Infarction and Congestive Heart Failure. The
results suggest that converted hospitals have experienced quality changes before 
conversion and that ignoring these changes may bias the estimates of conversion
effects. Both conversions are found to have some adverse consequences: Hospitals 
that converted to FP form show an increase in AMI mortality rates, while those
converted to NFP status indicate an increase in CHF mortality outcomes.

PMID: 15277779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2010 Aug;7(8):422-4. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2010.102.

Heart failure: Early follow-up after hospitalization for heart failure.

Gheorghiade M, Bonow RO.

PMID: 20657609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2011 Aug 1;108(3):402-8. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.03.059.

Usefulness of acute delirium as a predictor of adverse outcomes in patients >65
years of age with acute decompensated heart failure.

Uthamalingam S(1), Gurm GS, Daley M, Flynn J, Capodilupo R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA.
suthamalingam@partners.org

Delirium is an acute confusional state that is very prevalent in older patients
hospitalized with acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF). The association
between delirium and ADHF outcome has not been well described. We analyzed 883
consecutive patients >65 years of age admitted with ADHF. Acute delirium was
diagnosed based on the Confusion Assessment Method. Delirious patients (total n =
151) had an increased in-hospital all-cause death compared to nondelirious
patients (n = 17, 11%, vs n = 45, 6%; adjusted odds ratio [OR] 1.93, 95%
confidence interval [CI] 1.07 to 3.48, p = 0.02). Of those surviving to discharge
(n = 821), on multivariable logistic regression analysis, delirium was
independently associated with increased risk of 30-day (adjusted OR 4.24, 95% CI 
2.77 to 6.47, p <0.001) and 90-day (adjusted OR 3.72, 95% CI 2.51 to 5.54, p
<0.001) rehospitalizations for ADHF and higher nursing home placement (adjusted
OR 2.70, 95% CI 1.59 to 5.30, p <0.001) after adjusting for age, gender, cardiac 
risk factors, dementia, activities of daily living, instrumental activities of
daily living, coronary artery disease, atrial fibrillation, left ventricular
ejection fraction, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and/or angiotensin
receptor blocker, β blockers, Charlson co-morbidity index, and other potential
confounders. Furthermore, delirium was strongly associated with 90-day all-cause 
mortality in patients discharged from the hospital (adjusted hazard ratio 2.10,
CI 1.53 to 2.88, p <0.0001). In conclusion, acute delirium serves as an important
prognostic determinant of in-hospital and posthospital discharge outcomes
including increased ADHF readmission risk in older hospitalized patients with
ADHF. Thus, delirium plays an important role in the risk stratification and
prognosis of patients with ADHF.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21757045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Kardiologiia. 2011;51(6):32-7.

[Clinical value of brain natriuretic peptide level in patients with atrial
fibrillation].

[Article in Russian]

Kolesnikova AV, Ivleva AIa, Lagutina OE, Vorontsova IuA, Sivkova EV.

PURPOSE of this investigation was to study correlation between brain natriuretic 
peptide (BNP), extent of cardiac abnormalities, and six minute walk test (6-MWT) 
in order to asses diagnostic value of BNP in patients with trial fibrillation
(F), heart failure (HF) and preserved systolic function.MATERIAL AND METHODS:
Sixty five patients with history of hypertension, permanent F, and shortness of
breath in absence of signs of congestive hemodynamics were included into this
study.
RESULTS: Concentration of BNP in serum n the day of inclusion was significantly
inversely related to results of 6-MWT, and positively related to left atrial
dilation, to hospitalizations due to cardiovascular causes.
CONCLUSION: Measurement of BNP concentration in patients with AF allows to
diagnose HF at early stages and to predict cardiovascular complications.

PMID: 21878068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2009 Aug 1;104(3):389-92. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2009.03.059. Epub 
2009 Jun 6.

Usefulness of cystatin C and prognosis following admission for acute heart
failure.

Campbell CY(1), Clarke W, Park H, Haq N, Barone BB, Brotman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Cystatin C is a novel marker of renal function that has been found to predict
adverse cardiovascular outcomes in ambulatory patients. The aim of this study was
to investigate whether this biomarker predicts the length of hospitalization and 
adverse outcomes in patients hospitalized for heart failure. Two hundred forty
consecutive patients aged > or =25 admitted to Johns Hopkins Hospital with
exacerbations of heart failure were prospectively enrolled. Cystatin C levels
were measured on admission. Patients were followed for 1 year. The primary
outcome measure was the length of hospitalization. Secondary outcomes included
all-cause mortality and readmission for heart failure. Cystatin C showed no
significant association with the length of hospitalization. Patients in the
highest quartile (quartile 4) of cystatin C level were at increased risk for
death (hazard ratio 2.07 for quartile 4 vs quartiles 1 to 3, p = 0.01) and death 
or rehospitalization (hazard ratio 1.61 for quartile 4 vs quartiles 1 to 3, p =
0.01). The association between cystatin C and the combined end point of death or 
rehospitalization during 1-year follow-up remained significant after adjusting
for age, race, gender, co-morbidities, and creatinine. Cystatin C was more
predictive of these end points than creatinine, and the combination of cystatin C
and creatinine was more predictive than either variable alone. In conclusion,
cystatin C may be useful in addition to creatinine for predicting outcomes after 
admission for acute heart failure exacerbations.

PMID: 19616673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Prof Case Manag. 2012 Sep-Oct;17(5):219-26; quiz 227-8.

Case management programs for hospital readmission prevention.

Askren-Gonzalez A(1), Frater J.

Author information: 
(1)Milliman Care Guidelines, 4370 La Jolla Village Drive, Suite 700, San Diego,
CA, 92122, USA. angela.gonzalez@milliman.com

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES: This article examines the recent hospital emphasis on
preventing hospital readmission. This article also identifies hospital programs
that help prevent such readmissions by using a systematic approach to transitions
of care.
PRIMARY PRACTICE SETTING(S): Hospital case management departments.
FINDINGS/CONCLUSIONS: A coordinated, patient-focused transition of care plan is a
key element in preventing hospital readmissions.
IMPLICATIONS FOR CASE MANAGEMENT PRACTICE: Leaders in hospital case management
will have new demands placed on them to prevent patients from returning to the
hospital after discharge. Leaders may choose to model demonstration programs, or 
they may implement unique strategies that support readmission prevention efforts.

PMID: 22850655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Cleve Clin J Med. 2013 Jan;80 Electronic Suppl 1:eS20-6. doi:
10.3949/ccjm.80.e-s1.05.

Home-based care for heart failure: Cleveland Clinic's "Heart Care at Home"
transitional care program.

Gorodeski EZ(1), Chlad S, Vilensky S.

Author information: 
(1)Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, J3-4,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. gorodee@ccf.org

With length of hospital stay for heart failure patients steadily decreasing, the 
home has become an increasingly important venue of care. Contemporary research
suggests that postacute, home-based care of patients with chronic heart failure
may yield outcomes similar to those of clinic-based outpatient care. However, the
transition to home-based care is associated with a number of risks. Indeed, these
patients often experience a downward cycle of repeat hospitalization and
worsening functional capacity. In 2010, a group at Cleveland Clinic launched the 
"Heart Care at Home" program in order to minimize the risks that patients
experience both when being transitioned to home and when being cared for at home.
This program joins a handful of transitional care programs that have been
discussed in the medical literature.

PMID: 23420798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2008 Nov;1(4):234-41. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.108.794008.

Discordant short- and long-term outcomes associated with diabetes in patients
with heart failure: importance of age and sex: a population study of 5.1 million 
people in Scotland.

MacDonald MR(1), Jhund PS, Petrie MC, Lewsey JD, Hawkins NM, Bhagra S, Munoz N,
Varyani F, Redpath A, Chalmers J, MacIntyre K, McMurray JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Heart Failure Service, Golden Jubilee National Hospital, Glasgow,
United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes and heart failure frequently coexist. Our aim was to assess 
the association between diabetes and short- and long-term outcomes in all
patients admitted to the hospital for the first time with heart failure in
Scotland between 1986 and 2003.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 116 556 patients were studied, of whom 13% (n=15 
161) had a diagnosis of diabetes. At 30 days, diabetes was associated with a
lower case fatality. By 1 year, the association between diabetes and better
outcome was reversed, and diabetes was a significant independent predictor of
higher case fatality. The longer term risk of death associated with diabetes was 
greatest in younger patients. In patients aged 65 years or younger, the hazard
ratio for mortality at 5 years associated with diabetes was 1.41 (95% CI, 1.31 to
1.52) for men and 1.64 (1.50 to 1.79) for women. The risk associated with
diabetes was less in patients aged 75 years or older: a hazard ratio in men 1.16 
(1.10 to 1.22) and in women 1.15 (1.10 to 1.20). In the younger age group the
risk associated with diabetes was significantly greater in women than in men
(P=0.005 for diabetes-sex interaction). Diabetes was also a significant
independent predictor of heart failure readmission, and again the risk was
greatest in younger women.
CONCLUSIONS: Although diabetes was associated with a lower case fatality at 30
days, by 1 year it was a significant independent predictor of higher case
fatality. The risk associated with diabetes was greatest in young patients, and
in young patients the risk was greatest in women.

PMID: 19808297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Nurs. 1999 Jul;99(7):69.

Working with relapse.

Snow D(1), Gorman M.

Author information: 
(1)PMHNP Program, University of Texas at Arlington School of Nursing, USA.

PMID: 10410137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Congest Heart Fail. 2009 Jul-Aug;15(4):170-5. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-7133.2009.00092.x.

Effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor
blocker therapy after hospital discharge on subsequent rehospitalization for
acute myocardial infarction and heart failure.

Hess G(1), Preblick R, Hill J, Plauschinat CA, Yaskin J.

Author information: 
(1)Surveillance Data Inc., Germantown Pike, Plymouth Meeting, PA 19462, USA.

American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines recommend
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) or angiotensin receptor blocker
(ARB) therapy following acute myocardial infarction (MI) or development of heart 
failure (HF). This study estimated the effects of initiating these therapies
after hospitalization for MI or HF on subsequent 1-year rehospitalization rates
for MI or HF. A retrospective multivariate analysis of medical claims for 14,327 
patients receiving and 7905 not receiving an ACEI or ARB after discharge for MI
or HF was conducted. Rehospitalization for MI or HF was lower for treated vs
untreated patients (MI: odds ratio [OR]=0.53, P<.001; HF: OR=0.52, P<.001).
Rehospitalization was lower in treated patients with high medication compliance
(medication possession ratio [MPR]>80%) and medium compliance (MPR 40%-79%) vs
patients with low compliance (ORs for MI: high=0.54, medium=0.69; P<.001); ORs
for HF: high=0.38, medium=0.62; P<.001). In conclusion, ACEI or ARB therapy
initiated after hospitalization for MI or HF reduced risk of rehospitalization,
and greater risk reduction was achieved with higher medication compliance.

PMID: 19627290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Home Healthc Nurse. 2013 Jul-Aug;31(7):368-77. doi: 10.1097/NHH.0b013e318291fd56.

The effect of telemonitoring at home on quality of life and self-care behaviors
of patients with heart failure.

Hoban MB(1), Fedor M, Reeder S, Chernick M.

Author information: 
(1)Home Care Network, Main Line Health, Jefferson University Hospitals, 240
Radnor Chester Rd., Radnor, PA 19087, USA. hobanm@mlhs.org

Heart failure (HF) is a costly chronic disease that affects 5.7 million people in
the United States. Home healthcare agencies are implementing initiatives to
reduce hospitalizations and manage HF patients at home. In this study,
telemonitoring improved patients' perception of their quality of life and
assisted them to sustain critical self-care behaviors. Patients who were
monitored had fewer hospitalizations but telemonitoring was not statistically
significant in lowering hospitalizations.

PMID: 23632274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Can J Cardiol. 2014 Jun;30(6):612-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2014.02.017. Epub 2014
Feb 28.

Determinants of early readmission after hospitalization for heart failure.

Eastwood CA(1), Howlett JG(2), King-Shier KM(1), McAlister FA(3), Ezekowitz
JA(4), Quan H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Nursing, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Departments of Cardiac Sciences and Medicine, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. (3)Division of General Internal 
Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (4)Division of
Cardiology, Mazankowski Alberta Heart Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada. (5)Department of Community Health Sciences and Institute of
Public Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. Electronic
address: hquan@ucalgary.ca.

BACKGROUND: Determination of factors increasing the likelihood of early
readmission after hospitalization for heart failure (HF) is fundamental for
identifying potential targets for intervention. Thus, we studied the
characteristics of patients readmitted within 7 and 30 days after hospitalization
for HF in Alberta, Canada.
METHODS: Using hospital discharge abstract data, we followed patients with
incident HF discharged from April 2004-March 2012 and determined their
readmission status within 7 and 30 days after an index hospitalization. Logistic 
regression was used to determine variables associated with readmission.
RESULTS: Of 18,590 patients with HF (49.8% women; mean age 76.4 years), 5.6% were
readmitted within 7 days and 18% were readmitted within 30 days. Readmission
rates within 7 and 30 days increased significantly with age. Seven-day all-cause 
readmissions were associated with history of kidney disease (adjusted odds ratio 
[aOR], 1.28; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.08-1.53), and 30-day all-cause
readmissions were associated with cancer, pulmonary, liver, and kidney disease.
Discharge with home care services at the time of discharge was a risk factor for 
readmission within 7 days (aOR, 1.26; 95% CI, 1.07-1.49) and 30 days (aOR, 1.23; 
95% CI, 1.11-1.35). Discharge from a hospital with HF services was associated
with lower readmission at both 7 days (aOR, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.57-0.74) and 30 days 
(aOR, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.65-0.77).
CONCLUSIONS: Several factors were associated with increased risk of readmission, 
whereas patients discharged from hospitals with HF services had a lower risk of
readmission within 7 and 30 days of discharge. The interaction of provision of
home care and higher early readmission deserves further study.

Copyright © 2014 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 24882531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2007 Oct 1;100(7):1139-44. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Effect of gender, ethnicity, pulmonary disease, and symptom stability on
rehospitalization in patients with heart failure.

Howie-Esquivel J(1), Dracup K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Nursing, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California, USA. jill.howie-esquivel@nursing.ucsf.edu

Predicting rehospitalization risk may enable more tailored therapies for patients
at high risk of rehospitalization. The objective of this study was to determine
whether demographic, clinical, or psychological variables conferred increased
risk of rehospitalization in a multiethnic, hospitalized, heart failure (HF)
population. Demographic and clinical data were collected, with psychological and 
functional (6-minute walk test [6MWT]) variables obtained within 48 hours of
discharge. Patients with HF (n = 72) were followed up for 90 days after
discharge. Subjects' mean age was 62 +/- 18 years, with almost 1/2 nonwhite (n = 
32) and 2/3 men (n = 47). Mean discharge brain natriuretic peptide was 825 +/-
716 ng/L, mean quality-of-life score was 34 +/- 21, and mean 6MWT distance was
186 +/- 99 m. Almost 1/2 (n = 34) were rehospitalized for cardiac reasons within 
90 days. Women had a 2.5 times greater risk for rehospitalization than men. Both 
female gender and nonwhite ethnicity incurred > or =2 times greater risk of
cardiac rehospitalization. Brain natriuretic peptide and 6MWT score did not
predict rehospitalization risk. In conclusion, sociodemographic factors may be
more powerful predictors of rehospitalization than known clinical markers in
multiethnic patients hospitalized for HF. Evaluation for support services is
needed to prevent rehospitalization, especially in women and nonwhites.

PMID: 17884378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JAMA. 2013 Feb 13;309(6):587-93. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.333.

Relationship between hospital readmission and mortality rates for patients
hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, or pneumonia.

Krumholz HM(1), Lin Z, Keenan PS, Chen J, Ross JS, Drye EE, Bernheim SM, Wang Y, 
Bradley EH, Han LF, Normand SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine/Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, 1 Church St, Ste 200, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
harlan.krumholz@yale.edu

IMPORTANCE: The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services publicly reports
hospital 30-day, all-cause, risk-standardized mortality rates (RSMRs) and 30-day,
all-cause, risk-standardized readmission rates (RSRRs) for acute myocardial
infarction, heart failure, and pneumonia. The evaluation of hospital performance 
as measured by RSMRs and RSRRs has not been well characterized.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the relationship between hospital RSMRs and RSRRs overall
and within subgroups defined by hospital characteristics.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We studied Medicare fee-for-service
beneficiaries discharged with acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, or
pneumonia between July 1, 2005, and June 30, 2008 (4506 hospitals for acute
myocardial infarction, 4767 hospitals for heart failure, and 4811 hospitals for
pneumonia). We quantified the correlation between hospital RSMRs and RSRRs using 
weighted linear correlation; evaluated correlations in groups defined by hospital
characteristics; and determined the proportion of hospitals with better and worse
performance on both measures.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Hospital 30-day RSMRs and RSRRs.
RESULTS: Mean RSMRs and RSRRs, respectively, were 16.60% and 19.94% for acute
myocardial infarction, 11.17% and 24.56% for heart failure, and 11.64% and 18.22%
for pneumonia. The correlations between RSMRs and RSRRs were 0.03 (95% CI, -0.002
to 0.06) for acute myocardial infarction, -0.17 (95% CI, -0.20 to -0.14) for
heart failure, and 0.002 (95% CI, -0.03 to 0.03) for pneumonia. The results were 
similar for subgroups defined by hospital characteristics. Although there was a
significant negative linear relationship between RSMRs and RSRRs for heart
failure, the shared variance between them was only 2.9% (r2 = 0.029), with the
correlation most prominent for hospitals with RSMR <11%.
CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: Risk-standardized mortality rates and readmission rates
were not associated for patients admitted with an acute myocardial infarction or 
pneumonia and were only weakly associated, within a certain range, for patients
admitted with heart failure.

PMCID: PMC3621028
PMID: 23403683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Hosp Med. 2012 Nov-Dec;7(9):690-6. doi: 10.1002/jhm.1965. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Correlations among risk-standardized mortality rates and among risk-standardized 
readmission rates within hospitals.

Horwitz LI(1), Wang Y, Desai MM, Curry LA, Bradley EH, Drye EE, Krumholz HM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Yale-New Haven Health System, New
Haven, CT, USA. leora.horwitz@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: Hospital-level, 30-day risk-standardized mortality and readmission
rates are publicly reported for Medicare patients admitted with acute myocardial 
infarction (AMI), heart failure (HF), and pneumonia, but the correlations among
mortality rates and among readmission rates within US hospitals for these
conditions are unknown. Correlation among measures within the same hospital would
suggest that there are common hospital-wide quality factors.
METHODS: We designed a cross-sectional study of US hospital 30-day
risk-standardized mortality and readmission rates for Medicare fee-for-service
beneficiaries from July 2007 to June 2009. We assessed the correlation between
pairs of risk-standardized mortality rates and pairs of risk-standardized
readmission rates for AMI, HF, and pneumonia.
RESULTS: The mortality cohort included 4559 hospitals, and the readmission cohort
included 4468 hospitals. Every mortality measure was significantly correlated
with every other mortality measure (range of correlation coefficients, 0.27-0.41,
P < 0.0001 for all correlations). Every readmission measure was significantly
correlated with every other readmission measure (range of correlation
coefficients, 0.32-0.47, P < 0.0001 for all correlations). For each condition
pair and outcome, one-third or more of hospitals were in the same quartile of
performance. Correlations were highest within large, nonprofit, urban, and/or
Council of Teaching Hospitals members. For any given condition pair, the
correlation between readmission rates was significantly higher than the
correlation between mortality rates (P < 0.01 for all pairs).
CONCLUSION: Risk-standardized readmission rates are moderately correlated with
each other within hospitals, as are risk-standardized mortality rates. This
suggests that there may be common hospital-wide factors affecting hospital
outcomes.

Copyright © 2012 Society of Hospital Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3535010
PMID: 22865546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Jun 10;3(3):e000806. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.000806.

B-type natriuretic peptide predicts 30-day readmission for heart failure but not 
readmission for other causes.

Flint KM(1), Allen LA(2), Pham M(3), Heidenreich PA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA (K.M.F.,
M.P., P.A.H.). (2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO (L.A.A.) Colorado Cardiovascular
Outcomes Research Consortium, Denver, CO (L.A.A.). (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA (K.M.F., M.P., P.A.H.) Veterans
Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA (M.P., P.A.H.).

BACKGROUND: B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is a marker for heart failure (HF)
severity, but its association with hospital readmission is not well defined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We identified all hospital discharges (n=109 875) with a
primary diagnosis of HF in the Veterans Affairs Health Care System from 2006 to
2009. We examined the association between admission (n=53 585), discharge (n=24
326), and change in BNP (n=7187) and 30-day readmission for HF or other causes.
Thirty-day HF readmission was associated with elevated admission BNP, elevated
discharge BNP, and smaller percent change in BNP from admission to discharge.
Patients with a discharge BNP ≥ 1000 ng/L had an unadjusted 30-day HF readmission
rate over 3 times as high as patients whose discharge BNP was ≤ 200 ng/L (15% vs.
4.1%). BNP improved discrimination and risk classification for 30-day HF
readmission when added to a base clinical model, with discharge BNP having the
greatest effect (C-statistic, 0.639 to 0.664 [P<0.0001]; net reclassification
improvement, 9% [P<0.0001]). In contrast, 30-day readmission for non-HF causes
was not associated with BNP levels during index HF hospitalization.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study of over 50 000 veterans hospitalized with a primary
diagnosis of HF, BNP levels measured during hospitalization were associated with 
30-day HF readmission, but not readmissions for other causes. These data may help
guide future study aimed at identifying the optimal timing for hospital discharge
and help allocate high-intensity, HF-specific transitional care interventions to 
the patients most likely to benefit.

© 2014 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., 
by Wiley Blackwell.

PMCID: PMC4309072
PMID: 24922626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Psychosomatics. 2011 Jul-Aug;52(4):319-27. doi: 10.1016/j.psym.2011.02.007.

Linking electronic health record-extracted psychosocial data in real-time to risk
of readmission for heart failure.

Watson AJ(1), O'Rourke J, Jethwani K, Cami A, Stern TA, Kvedar JC, Chueh HC, Zai 
AH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Connected Health, Partners Healthcare, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Knowledge of psychosocial characteristics that helps to identify
patients at increased risk for readmission for heart failure (HF) may facilitate 
timely and targeted care.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that certain psychosocial characteristics extracted
from the electronic health record (EHR) would be associated with an increased
risk for hospital readmission within the next 30 days.
METHODS: We identified 15 psychosocial predictors of readmission. Eleven of these
were extracted from the EHR (six from structured data sources and five from
unstructured clinical notes). We then analyzed their association with the
likelihood of hospital readmission within the next 30 days among 729 patients
admitted for HF. Finally, we developed a multivariable predictive model to
recognize individuals at high risk for readmission.
RESULTS: We found five characteristics-dementia, depression, adherence,
declining/refusal of services, and missed clinical appointments-that were
associated with an increased risk for hospital readmission: the first four
features were captured from unstructured clinical notes, while the last item was 
captured from a structured data source.
CONCLUSIONS: Unstructured clinical notes contain important knowledge on the
relationship between psychosocial risk factors and an increased risk of
readmission for HF that would otherwise have been missed if only structured data 
were considered. Gathering this EHR-based knowledge can be automated, thus
enabling timely and targeted care.

Copyright © 2011 The Academy of Psychosomatic Medicine. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4452280
PMID: 21777714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Lippincotts Case Manag. 2001 Nov-Dec;6(6):246-55.

Variables that discriminate length of stay and readmission within 30 days among
heart failure patients.

Armola RR(1), Topp R.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Ohio, 3065 Arlington Avenue, Dowling Hall, Outcome
Management, Toledo, OH 43614-5807, USA. rarmola@mco.edu

The purpose of this study was to determine which variables may discriminate
between a short length of stay (LOS) and a long LOS and readmission within 30
days among heart failure (HF) patients discharged from a hospital. The charts of 
188 patients who were discharged with diagnostic related group 127 during
September 30, 1997, until October 31, 1998, were retrospectively reviewed to
examine the association between LOS and readmission among 12 variables. It was
discovered that an increased number of physicians involved during the patient's
hospitalization (p = 0.000) and case management involvement (p = 0.007) were
discriminating variables for those patients with a longer LOS. The variables of
serum sodium (p = 0.032) and higher NYHA classification (p = 0.018) approached
significance in discriminating a longer LOS. HF patients who were readmitted
within 30 days were significantlyfound to have an increased NYHA class (p =
0.002) and no specific follow-up plan arranged related to the patients' HF
diagnosis (p = 0.005). The results of this study indicate several variables that 
significantly discriminate LOS and readmission within 30 days among HF patients
that case managers can employ to improve care to this population.

PMID: 16398071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Rev Clin Esp (Barc). 2013 Jan-Feb;213(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.rce.2012.10.006.
Epub 2012 Dec 22.

Trends and predictors of hospitalization, readmissions and length of stay in
ambulatory patients with heart failure.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Frigola-Capell E(1), Comin-Colet J, Davins-Miralles J, Gich-Saladich I, Wensing
M, Verdú-Rotellar JM.

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Scientific Institute for Quality
of Healthcare, The Netherlands, Instituto Universitario Avedis Donabedian FAD,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain, Red de investigación en servicios de
salud en enfermedades crónicas REDISSEC, Spain. fad@fadq.org

OBJECTIVES: Little is known on predictors of hospitalisation in ambulatory
patients with chronic heart failure, and known predictors may not apply to
Mediterranean countries. Our aim was to document longitudinal trends in
hospitalisations and identify patient-related predictors of hospital admission,
re-admission and length of stay in the targeted population.
METHODS: Population-based retrospective cohort study in Catalonia (North-East
Spain), including 7196 ambulatory patients (58.6% women; mean age 76 years).
Eligible patients were selected from the electronic patient records of primary
care practices, and followed for 3 years.
RESULTS: At 3 years of follow up overall 645 (9.0%) patients had cardiovascular
hospitalisation, 37% were readmitted, and median length of stay was 9
(interquartile range 5-17) days. Chronic kidney disease [odds ratio (OR)=1.98
(1.62-2.43)], IHD [OR=1.72 (1.45-2.04)], DM [OR=1.50 (1.27-1.78)] and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease [OR=1.43 (1.16-1.77)] increased the risk for
hospitalisation. DM [OR=1.70 (1.22-2.38)], IHD [OR=1.85 (1.33-2.58)] and HTA
[OR=1.66 (1.11-2.46)] increased the risk for readmissions. Chronic kidney disease
[OR of 2.21 (1.70-2.90)], IHD [OR of 2.19 (1.73-2.77)], DM [OR=1.70 (1.34-2.15)],
HTA [OR=1.51 (1.13-2.01)], chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [OR=1.37
(1.02-1.83)] increased the risk for long length of stay in hospital.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified predictors of hospitalisation, readmissions and
long length of stay which can help clinicians and managers to identify high risk 
patients which should be targeted on service planning and when designing
preventive actions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23266127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart. 2005 Nov;91(11):1466-8.

Impact of pre-diabetic state on clinical outcomes in patients with acute coronary
syndrome.

Otten R, Kline-Rogers E, Meier DJ, Dumasia R, Fang J, May N, Resin Y, Armstrong
DF, Saab F, Petrina M, Eagle KA, Mukherjee D.

PMCID: PMC1769179
PMID: 16230445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Card Fail. 2005 Apr;11(3):200-5.

Demographics, clinical characteristics, and outcomes of patients hospitalized for
decompensated heart failure: observations from the IMPACT-HF registry.

O'Connor CM(1), Stough WG, Gallup DS, Hasselblad V, Gheorghiade M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Duke University Medical Center
and Clinical Research Institute, 2400 N. Pratt Street, Durham, NC 27705, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hospitalizations for decompensated heart failure are frequent. The
Initiation Management Pre-discharge Assessment of Carvedilol Heart Failure
(IMPACT-HF) registry collected observational data in patients hospitalized for
worsening heart failure to characterize an unselected group of patients and to
confirm the generalizability of the IMPACT-HF main trial population.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The IMPACT-HF registry was conducted concurrently with the
IMPACT-HF study, a randomized trial of in-hospital initiation of carvedilol
compared with the standard practice of postdischarge beta-blocker initiation.
Patients were eligible for registry enrollment if they were hospitalized for
heart failure regardless of ejection fraction. There were no exclusions to
participation. Patients were followed for 60 days. The IMPACT-HF Registry
enrolled 567 patients. The mean age was 71 years, 52% of the patients were men
and 82% were Caucasian. At discharge, 71% received an angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker, 41% received digoxin, and 62%
received beta-blockers. The 60-day rate of rehospitalization or death was 31%.
CONCLUSION: The IMPACT-HF registry enrolled elderly patients admitted for
worsening heart failure primarily resulting from progressive volume overload. The
60-day rate of death or rehospitalization was high despite the use of
evidence-based therapies. New treatments for this population are needed to
decrease the morbidity and mortality associated with decompensated heart failure.

PMID: 15812748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2012 Sep;9(3):252-9. doi: 10.1007/s11897-012-0100-1.

The challenge of heart failure discharge from the emergency department.

Ho EC(1), Schull MJ, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, Division of Cardiology, University
Health Network, Room G-106, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, ON, M4N 3M5, Canada.

Acute decompensated heart failure is a common reason for presentation to the
emergency department and is associated with high rates of admission to hospital. 
Distinguishing between higher-risk patients needing hospitalization and
lower-risk patients suitable for discharge home is important to optimize both
cost-effectiveness and clinical outcomes. However, this can be challenging and
few validated risk stratification tools currently exist to help clinicians. Some 
prognostic variables predict risks broadly in those who are admitted or
discharged from the emergency department. Risk stratification methods such as the
Emergency Heart Failure Mortality Risk Grade and Acute Heart Failure Index
clinical decision support tools, which utilize many of these predictors, have
been found to be accurate in identifying low-risk patients. The use of
observation units may also be a cost-effective adjunctive strategy that can
assist in determining disposition from the emergency department.

PMCID: PMC3406314
PMID: 22798046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Chem. 2003 Dec;49(12):2020-6.

Prognostic value of combination of cardiac troponin T and B-type natriuretic
peptide after initiation of treatment in patients with chronic heart failure.

Ishii J(1), Cui W, Kitagawa F, Kuno T, Nakamura Y, Naruse H, Mori Y, Ishikawa T, 
Nagamura Y, Kondo T, Oshima H, Nomura M, Ezaki K, Hishida H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Critical Care, Fujita Health University Graduate School of Health 
Sciences, Toyoake 470-1192, Japan. jishi@fujita-hu.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have suggested that cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and
troponin I may detect ongoing myocardial damage involved in the progression of
chronic heart failure (CHF). This study was prospectively designed to examine
whether the combination of cTnT, a marker for ongoing myocardial damage, and
B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), a marker for left ventricular overload, would
effectively stratify patients with CHF after initiation of treatment.
METHODS: We measured serum cTnT, plasma BNP, and left ventricular ejection
fraction (LVEF) on admission for worsening CHF [New York Heart Association (NYHA)
functional class III to IV] and 2 months after initiation of treatment to
stabilize CHF (n = 100; mean age, 68 years).
RESULTS: Mean (SD) concentrations of cTnT [0.023 (0.066) vs 0.063 (0.20) micro
g/L] and BNP [249 (276) vs 753 (598) ng/L], percentage increased cTnT (>0.01
micro g/L; 35% vs 60%), NYHA functional class [2.5 (0.6) vs 3.5 (5)], and LVEF
[43 (13)% vs 36 (12)%] were significantly (P <0.01) improved 2 months after
treatment compared with admission. During a mean follow-up of 391 days, there
were 44 cardiac events, including 12 cardiac deaths and 32 readmissions for
worsening CHF. On a stepwise Cox regression analysis, increased cTnT and BNP were
independent predictors of cardiac events (P <0.001). cTnT >0.01 micro g/L and/or 
BNP >160 ng/L 2 months after initiation of treatment were associated with
increased cardiac mortality and morbidity rates.
CONCLUSION: The combination of cTnT and BNP measurements after initiation of
treatment may be highly effective for risk stratification in patients with CHF.

PMID: 14633873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JACC Heart Fail. 2013 Aug;1(4):361-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2013.04.010. Epub 2013 
Aug 5.

Drug therapy to reduce early readmission risk in heart failure: ready for prime
time?

Vaduganathan M(1), Fonarow GC(2), Gheorghiade M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Ahmanson-UCLA Cardiomyopathy Center, Ronald
Reagan-UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, California. (3)Center for Cardiovascular
Innovation at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois. Electronic address: m-gheorghiade@northwestern.edu.

Comment in
    JACC Heart Fail. 2015 Mar;3(3):268-9.
    JACC Heart Fail. 2015 Mar;3(3):269-70.

Readmission for heart failure remains a major focus of policymakers, clinicians, 
and patients. Despite meeting key national performance measures and frequent use 
of evidence-based therapies, rates of 30-day post-discharge rehospitalization may
be as high as 25%. Digoxin and mineralocorticoid antagonists are known to reduce 
admissions for heart failure, but are significantly underused in current clinical
practice despite their proven benefits.

Copyright © 2013 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24621940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Crit Pathw Cardiol. 2008 Sep;7(3):153-72. doi: 10.1097/HPC.0b013e31818207e4.

Critical pathway for the management of acute heart failure at the Veterans
Affairs San Diego Healthcare System: transforming performance measures into
cardiac care.

Gardetto NJ(1), Greaney K, Arai L, Brenner A, Carroll KC, Howerton NM, Lee M,
Pada L, Tseng M, Maisel AS.

Author information: 
(1)San Diego VA Medical Center, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
gardetto.nancy@va.med

BACKGROUND: Acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF) is a major public health
problem and leading cause for hospitalization in people 65 years and older.
Admission rates for ADHF, accounted for more than 1 million heart failure (HF)
hospitalizations in 2004, and more than 6.5 million inpatient hospital days.
Despite significant advances in HF management, including pharmacotherapy and
devices; and extensive collaborative efforts of the American College of
Cardiology, and American Heart Association to disseminate evidence-based practice
guidelines for management of chronic HF in adults; 3 patients continue to present
to the emergency departments in ADHF. The hospital treatment of HF frequently
does not follow published guidelines, potentially contributing to the high
morbidity, mortality, and economic cost of this disorder. This highlights an
ongoing need for development of quality improvement programs that focus on
delivering reliable, evidence-based care for patients with ADHF. Consequently,
the development of clinical pathways has the potential to reduce the current
variability in care, enhance guideline adherence, and improve outcomes for
patients.
METHODS: The Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System (VASDHCS) formed a
multidisciplinary HF performance improvement team. The team set forth on the task
of developing standard order sets for patients with ADHF. After analyzing local
care processes, reviewing evidence of best care practices, and defining
appropriate goals to satisfy the multidimensional needs of HF patient; the team
developed a computerized pathway in a user-friendly format that is simple, yet
comprehensive; and focuses on early stages of HF evaluation and treatment for
patients presenting to the emergency department.
RESULTS: Successful strategies to improve care for HF patients need to assist
health care providers with rapid recognition and early aggressive treatment,
while creating a reliable process that ensures continuity of care. This critical 
pathway for management of acute HF at the VASDHCS provides computerized order
sets that guide health care providers through accepted treatment regimens,
providing documentation of treatment and assists with compliance data collection.
The quality of the care is assessed by monitoring the nationally established
performance measures for HF. Through the use of the HF computerized order sets,
the VASDHCS currently achieves a performance level above most Joint Commission
accredited organizations and in many areas achieves the best possible results
compared with the top 10% of hospitals in the nation.

PMID: 18791404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circulation. 2012 Jul 24;126(4):501-6. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.125435.

Rehospitalization for heart failure: predict or prevent?

Desai AS(1), Stevenson LW.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
adesai@partners.org

PMID: 22825412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Ir J Med Sci. 2010 Jun;179(2):255-8. doi: 10.1007/s11845-009-0452-z. Epub 2009
Nov 29.

Frequency and risk factors associated with emergency medical readmissions in
Galway University Hospitals.

Gorman J(1), Vellinga A, Gilmartin JJ, O'Keeffe ST.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Health Office, Merlin Park University Hospital, HSE West, Galway,
Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Unplanned readmissions of medical hospital patients have been
increasing in recent years. We examined the frequency and associates of emergency
medical readmissions to Galway University Hospitals (GUH).
METHOD: Readmissions during the calendar year 2006 were examined using hospital
in-patient enquiry data. Associations with clinical and demographic factors were 
determined using univariate and multivariate analyses.
RESULTS: The medical emergency readmission rate to GUH, after correction for
death during the index admission, was 19.5%. Age 65 years or more, male gender,
length of stay more than 7 days and primary diagnoses of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, myocardial infarction, alcohol-related disease and heart
failure during the index admission were significantly associated with readmission
in univariate and multivariate analyses.
CONCLUSION: The medical emergency readmission rate in GUH is comparable to other 
acute hospitals in Ireland and Britain. Further evaluation is needed to estimate 
the proportion of readmissions that are potentially avoidable.

PMID: 20091137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Jan 13;53(2):184-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.09.031.

Clinical effectiveness of beta-blockers in heart failure: findings from the
OPTIMIZE-HF (Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in Hospitalized
Patients with Heart Failure) Registry.

Hernandez AF(1), Hammill BG, O'Connor CM, Schulman KA, Curtis LH, Fonarow GC.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, NC 27715, USA.
adrian.hernandez@duke.edu

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Dec 1;54(23):2202.

OBJECTIVES: We sought to examine associations between initiation of beta-blocker 
therapy and outcomes among elderly patients hospitalized for heart failure.
BACKGROUND: Beta-blockers are guideline-recommended therapy for heart failure,
but their clinical effectiveness is not well understood, especially in elderly
patients.
METHODS: We merged Medicare claims data with OPTIMIZE-HF (Organized Program to
Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in Hospitalized Patients With Heart Failure)
records to examine long-term outcomes of eligible patients newly initiated on
beta-blocker therapy. We used inverse probability-weighted Cox proportional
hazards models to determine the relationships among treatment and mortality,
rehospitalization, and a combined mortality-rehospitalization end point.
RESULTS: Observed 1-year mortality was 33%, and all-cause rehospitalization was
64%. Among 7,154 patients hospitalized with heart failure and eligible for
beta-blockers, 3,421 (49%) were newly initiated on beta-blocker therapy. Among
patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD) (n = 3,001),
beta-blockers were associated with adjusted hazard ratios of 0.77 (95% confidence
interval [CI]: 0.68 to 0.87) for mortality, 0.89 (95% CI: 0.80 to 0.99) for
rehospitalization, and 0.87 (95% CI: 0.79 to 0.96) for
mortality-rehospitalization. Among patients with preserved systolic function (n =
4,153), beta-blockers were associated with adjusted hazard ratios of 0.94 (95%
CI: 0.84 to 1.07) for mortality, 0.98 (95% CI: 0.90 to 1.06) for
rehospitalization, and 0.98 (95% CI: 0.91 to 1.06) for
mortality-rehospitalization.
CONCLUSIONS: In elderly patients hospitalized with heart failure and LVSD,
incident beta-blocker use was clinically effective and independently associated
with lower risks of death and rehospitalization. Patients with preserved systolic
function had poor outcomes, and beta-blockers did not significantly influence the
mortality and rehospitalization risks for these patients.

PMCID: PMC3513266
PMID: 19130987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002 Feb 6;39(3):471-80.

A randomized trial of the efficacy of multidisciplinary care in heart failure
outpatients at high risk of hospital readmission.

Kasper EK(1), Gerstenblith G, Hefter G, Van Anden E, Brinker JA, Thiemann DR,
Terrin M, Forman S, Gottlieb SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287-6568, USA. ekasper@jhmi.edu

OBJECTIVES: We sought to determine whether a multidisciplinary outpatient
management program decreases chronic heart failure (CHF) hospital readmissions
and mortality over a six-month period.
BACKGROUND: Hospital admission for CHF is an important problem amenable to
improved outpatient management.
METHODS: Two hundred patients hospitalized with CHF at increased risk of hospital
readmission were randomized to a multidisciplinary program or usual care. A study
cardiologist and a CHF nurse evaluated each patient and made recommendations to
the patient's primary physician before randomization. The intervention team
consisted of a cardiologist, a CHF nurse, a telephone nurse coordinator and the
patient's primary physician. Contact with the patient was on a prespecified
schedule. The CHF nurse followed an algorithm to adjust medications. Patients in 
the nonintervention group were followed as usual. The primary outcome was the
composite of the number of CHF hospital admissions and deaths over six months,
compared by using a log transformation t test by intention-to-treat analysis.
RESULTS: The median age of the study patients was 63.5 years, and 39.5% were
women. There were 43 CHF hospital admissions and 7 deaths in the intervention
group, as compared with 59 CHF hospital admissions and 13 deaths in the
nonintervention group (p = 0.09). The quality-of-life score, percentage of
patients on target vasodilator therapy and percentage of patients compliant with 
diet recommendations were significantly better in the intervention group. Cost
per patient, in 1998 U.S. dollars, was similar in both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that a six-month, multidisciplinary approach
to CHF management can improve important clinical outcomes at a similar cost in
recently hospitalized high-risk patients with CHF.

PMID: 11823086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Cardiol. 2012 Aug;35(8):474-7. doi: 10.1002/clc.21996. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Does the United States economy affect heart failure readmissions? A single
metropolitan center analysis.

Thompson KA(1), Morrissey RP, Phan A, Schwarz ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Cedars Sinai Heart Institute, 
Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA.

BACKGROUND: To determine the effects of the US economy on heart failure
hospitalization rates.
HYPOTHESIS: The recession was associated with worsening unemployment, loss of
private insurance and prescription medication benefits, medication nonadherence, 
and ultimately increased rates of hospitalization for heart failure.
METHODS: We compared hospitalization rates at a large, single, academic medical
center from July 1, 2006 to February 28, 2007, a time of economic stability, and 
July 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009, a time of economic recession in the United
States.
RESULTS: Significantly fewer patients had private medical insurance during the
economic recession than during the control period (36.5% vs 46%; P = 0.04).
Despite this, there were no differences in the heart failure hospitalization or
readmission rates, length of hospitalization, need for admission to an intensive 
care unit, in-hospital mortality, or use of guideline-recommended heart failure
medications between the 2 study periods.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that despite significant effects on medical insurance
coverage, rates of heart failure hospitalization at our institution were not
significantly affected by the recession. Additional large-scale population-based 
research is needed to better understand the effects of fluctuations in the US
economy on heart failure hospitalization rates.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22522474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Card Fail. 2007 Feb;13(1):8-13.

Prediction of rehospitalization and death in severe heart failure by physicians
and nurses of the ESCAPE trial.

Yamokoski LM(1), Hasselblad V, Moser DK, Binanay C, Conway GA, Glotzer JM,
Hartman KA, Stevenson LW, Leier CV.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

BACKGROUND: The predictive accuracy of physician investigators and nurse
coordinators in estimating the risk of rehospitalization and death was determined
for 373 hospitalized patients with severe advanced heart failure enrolled in the 
Evaluation Study of Congestive Heart Failure and Pulmonary Artery Catheterization
Effectiveness trial.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Estimates were made at discharge, and patients were followed
for 6 months after hospitalization. A statistical prognostic model was developed 
from clinical and laboratory data for the end points of rehospitalization and
death. Both nurse and physician predictions of death were generally associated
with the observed deaths (c-indices of 0.675 and 0.611), although the nurses'
prediction was significantly better (chi-square = 4.75, P = .029). The prediction
ability of the prognostic model was similar to the physicians' model (c-index =
0.603). The predictions of rehospitalization were much weaker for nurse,
physician and prognostic models.
CONCLUSIONS: Nurses' estimations of survival in discharged, advanced-stage heart 
failure patients were superior to either physicians' or model-based predictions. 
Not nurses, physicians, or the prognostic model provided useful predictions for
rehospitalizations, but this may have resulted from the fact that the
rehospitalization estimates did not include the death risk.

PMID: 17338997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013 Feb;10(2):85-97. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2012.181. Epub 2013 
Jan 8.

The disconnect between phase II and phase III trials of drugs for heart failure.

Vaduganathan M(1), Greene SJ, Ambrosy AP, Gheorghiade M, Butler J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, GRB-740, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Hospitalization for heart failure (HF) is a clinical entity associated with high 
postdischarge morbidity and mortality, yet few therapies are available to improve
outcomes in patients with this condition. In the past decade, large phase III
studies of HF treatments have failed to demonstrate drug efficacy, safety, or
both, despite encouraging results from preceding phase II trials. This Review is 
focused on this disconnect between the results of phase II and phase III trials
of drugs for HF and discusses findings from five drug-development programs (for
levosimendan, tezosentan, tolvaptan, rolofylline, and nesiritide) to shed light
on common themes in clinical trials conducted in patients hospitalized for HF. In
particular, the importance of selecting the 'right' patient population, drug, and
clinical end points to optimize the trial design is discussed. Areas that require
further investigation are highlighted and we suggest possible directions that
will help to guide future clinical trials in these patients. Large, expensive
phase III trials should not be initiated without adequate phase II evidence or on
the basis of overly optimistic interpretation of phase II data. Additionally,
drug development programs should be targeted not only to change short-term
symptoms, but also to improve the postdischarge event rate.

PMID: 23296069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2014 Dec;12(6):573-85. doi:
10.1007/s40258-014-0124-7.

Using decision trees to manage hospital readmission risk for acute myocardial
infarction, heart failure, and pneumonia.

Hilbert JP(1), Zasadil S, Keyser DJ, Peele PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Economics, UPMC Health Plan, U.S. Steel Tower, 9th Floor,
600 Grant Street, Pittsburgh, PA, 15219, USA.

To improve healthcare quality and reduce costs, the Affordable Care Act places
hospitals at financial risk for excessive readmissions associated with acute
myocardial infarction (AMI), heart failure (HF), and pneumonia (PN). Although
predictive analytics is increasingly looked to as a means for measuring,
comparing, and managing this risk, many modeling tools require data inputs that
are not readily available and/or additional resources to yield actionable
information. This article demonstrates how hospitals and clinicians can use their
own structured discharge data to create decision trees that produce highly
transparent, clinically relevant decision rules for better managing readmission
risk associated with AMI, HF, and PN. For illustrative purposes, basic decision
trees are trained and tested using publically available data from the California 
State Inpatient Databases and an open-source statistical package. As expected,
these simple models perform less well than other more sophisticated tools, with
areas under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (or AUC) of 0.612, 
0.583, and 0.650, respectively, but achieve a lift of at least 1.5 or greater for
higher-risk patients with any of the three conditions. More importantly, they are
shown to offer substantial advantages in terms of transparency and
interpretability, comprehensiveness, and adaptability. By enabling hospitals and 
clinicians to identify important factors associated with readmissions, target
subgroups of patients at both high and low risk, and design and implement
interventions that are appropriate to the risk levels observed, decision trees
serve as an ideal application for addressing the challenge of reducing hospital
readmissions.

PMID: 25160603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2010 Sep;63(9):1035-44.

Effect of acute heart failure following discharge in patients with
non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome on the subsequent risk of death or acute
myocardial infarction.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Núñez J(1), Sanchis J, Núñez E, Bodí V, Mainar L, Miñana G, Merlos P, Palau P,
Husser O, Rumiz E, Chorro FJ, Llàcer A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Universidad de
Valencia, Valencia, España. yulnunez@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Little is known about how prognosis is influenced by
readmission for acute heart failure (AHF) following non-ST-segment elevation
acute coronary syndrome (NSTEACS). The aim of this study was to determine the
prognostic effect of a first admission for AHF on the risk of acute myocardial
infarction (AMI) or death in patients who survived an episode of high-risk
NSTEACS.
METHODS: The study involved 972 consecutive patients with high-risk NSTEACS who
survived after hospital admission. Readmission for AHF was selected as the main
exposure variable, and its association with subsequent AMI or all-cause death was
assessed using Cox proportional hazards models for time-dependent covariates that
also included adjustment for competing risks.
RESULTS: After a median follow-up period of 30 [interquartile range, 12-48]
months, 82 patients (8.4%) were admitted for AHF, 146 (15%) had an AMI, and 202
(20.8%) died. The median time to readmission for AHF was 203 [56-336] days after 
NSTEACS. Patients readmitted for AHF had an increased risk of subsequent death
(hazard ratio [HR]=1.67; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.13-2.45; P=.009) or AMI 
(HR=2.15; 95% CI, 1.41-3.27; P< .001), which was independent of baseline
prognostic and time-dependent variables.
CONCLUSIONS: Readmission for AHF after high-risk NSTEACS was associated with an
increased risk of subsequent death or AMI.

PMID: 20804699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Ther. 2008;30 Pt 2:2217-27. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2008.12.005.

Retrospective claims database analysis to determine relationship between
renin-angiotensin system agents, rehospitalization, and health care costs in
patients with heart failure or myocardial infarction.

Sun SX(1), Ye X, Lee KY, Dupclay L Jr, Plauschinat C.

Author information: 
(1)Walgreens Health Services, Deerfield, Illinois, USA. ssun@tgrd.com

BACKGROUND: Heart failure (HF) and myocardial infarction (MI) cause considerable 
morbidity and mortality, but the outcomes and health care costs related to
adherence to treatment guidelines for HF and MI are not fully understood.
OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were as follows: (1) to determine the
proportion of patients discharged from the hospital with a primary diagnosis of
HF or MI who subsequently received prescriptions for American Heart
Association/American College of Cardiology-recommended angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), also referred 
to as renin-angiotensin system agents; (2) to investigate the relationship
between adherence to and persistence with ACEIs/ARBs and risk of
rehospitalization; and (3) to assess the relationship between adherence to and
persistence with ACEIs or ARBs, cardiovascular-related health care costs, and
total health care costs.
METHODS: Using the prescription and medical service records of a large national
pharmacy-benefit database, we conducted a retrospective analysis of patients
discharged from the hospital with a primary diagnosis of HF or MI between July 1,
2003, and June 30, 2006. Medication adherence, persistence, rehospitalization
risk, and health care costs during 1-year follow-up were measured. Logistic
regression models were used to estimate the likelihood of rehospitalization for
different levels of adherence and persistence. Generalized linear models were
used to investigate the impact of adherence and persistence on total health care 
costs and cardiovascular-related health care costs.
RESULTS: A total of 799 HF and 696 MI patients were included in the analysis;
57.20% of HF patients and 59.20% of MI patients were prescribed an ACEI or an ARB
after discharge from the hospital. The mean (SD) age was 65.7 (13.7) years in the
HF group and 60.6 (10.7) years in the MI group. In both groups, men accounted for
a greater proportion of the patients than women. In the HF group, adherence and
persistence were associated with a lower likelihood of rehospitalization compared
with nonadherence and nonpersistence (P < 0.042 and P < 0.005, respectively). In 
the MI group, there was no significant difference in rehospitalization risk
between those who were adherent and those who were not. However, among these
patients, persistence was associated with a lower risk of rehospitalization than 
nonpersistence (P < 0.036). Adherence and persistence were associated with lower 
health care costs (HF: P < 0.001 for all comparisons; MI: P < 0.019 for adherence
and total cost, P = NS for persistence and total cost, P < 0.012 for adherence
and cardiovascular cost, P < 0.031 for persistence and cardiovascular cost).
CONCLUSION: Adherence to and persistence with ACEIs or ARBs may reduce the risk
of rehospitalization in patients with HF or MI, thereby potentially reducing
health care costs.

PMID: 19281916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2010 Mar;3(2):244-52. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.109.884098. 
Epub 2010 Jan 8.

Thirty-day outcomes in Medicare patients with heart failure at heart transplant
centers.

Hummel SL(1), Pauli NP, Krumholz HM, Wang Y, Chen J, Normand SL, Nallamothu BK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich 48109-5853, USA. scothumm@med.umich.edu

BACKGROUND: Heart transplant centers are generally considered "centers of
excellence" for heart failure care. However, their overall performance has not
previously been evaluated in a broad population of elderly patients with heart
failure, many of whom are not transplant candidates.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We identified >1 million elderly Medicare beneficiaries who 
were hospitalized for heart failure between 2004 and 2006 at >4500 hospitals. We 
calculated 30-day risk-standardized mortality rates and standardized mortality
ratios as well as 30-day risk-standardized readmission rates and standardized
readmission ratios at heart transplant centers and non-heart transplant hospitals
using risk-standardization models that the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services uses for public reporting. The 30-day risk-standardized mortality rates 
were lower at heart transplant centers than non-heart transplant hospitals
nationally (10.6% versus 11.5%, P<0.001) but were similar at peer institutions
offering coronary artery bypass grafting within the same geographical region
(10.6% versus 10.6%, P=0.96). The mean standardized mortality ratio for heart
transplant centers was 0.9 (SD, 0.1; range, 0.7 to 1.3). No differences were
noted in 30-day risk-standardized readmission rates between heart transplant
centers and non-heart transplant hospitals nationally (23.6% versus 23.8%,
P=0.55). The mean standardized readmission ratio for heart transplant centers was
1.0 (SD, 0.1; range, 0.8 to 1.2).
CONCLUSIONS: In elderly Medicare patients with heart failure, heart transplant
centers have lower 30-day risk-standardized mortality rates than non-heart
transplant hospitals nationally; however, this difference is not present in
comparison with peer institutions or for 30-day risk-standardized readmission
rates.

PMID: 20061519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2011 Jun;10(2):124-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcnurse.2010.05.006.
Epub 2010 Jul 15.

Symptom variability, not severity, predicts rehospitalization and mortality in
patients with heart failure.

Moser DK(1), Frazier SK, Worrall-Carter L, Biddle MJ, Chung ML, Lee KS, Lennie
TA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0232, United States.
dmoser@uky.edu

BACKGROUND: Inability of heart failure (HF) patients to recognize worsening
symptoms that herald an exacerbation is a common reason for HF readmissions.
AIMS: To examine the relationship between patterns of HF symptom variability, and
HF event-free survival.
METHODS: Patients with HF (N=71) rated HF symptoms daily for 30 days. Symptoms
were rated on a 10 point scale anchored at the extreme ends by "worst symptom
could be" and "best symptom could be". Patients were followed for an average of 1
year to track HF and cardiac rehospitalizations and all-cause mortality.
RESULTS: Cox regression comparing event-free survival between patients who had
highly variable symptom ratings across the 30-days and those whose symptoms were 
less variable revealed worse event-free survival in patients with more variable
symptoms of shortness of breath or edema. Symptom variability predicted
event-free survival independently of severity of symptoms, ejection fraction,
comorbidities, age and gender. Symptom severity did not predict rehospitalization
or mortality.
CONCLUSION: Regardless of symptom severity, patients whose symptoms fluctuated in
an improving and worsening pattern were at substantially greater risk for poorer 
event-free survival. These patients may become accustomed to this pattern such
that they expect symptoms to improve and thus do not seek treatment with
worsening symptoms.

Copyright © 2010 European Society of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2987519
PMID: 20637697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Issue Brief (Commonw Fund). 2012 Dec;34:1-16.

Higher readmissions at safety-net hospitals and potential policy solutions.

Berenson J(1), Shih A.

Author information: 
(1)The Commonwealth Fund, USA. jb@cmwf.org

The Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program (HRRP), established by the Affordable
Care Act, ties a hospital's payments to its readmission rates--with penalties for
hospitals that exceed a national benchmark--to encourage hospitals to reduce
avoidable readmissions. This new Commonwealth Fund analysis uses publicly
reported 30-day hos­pital readmission rate data to examine whether safety-net
hospitals are more likely to have higher readmission rates, compared with other
hospitals. Results of this analysis find that safety-net hospitals are 30 percent
more likely to have 30-day hospital readmission rates above the national average,
compared with non-safety-net hospitals, and will therefore be disproportionately 
impacted by the HRRP. Policy solutions to help safety-net hospi­tals reduce their
readmission rates include targeting quality improvement initiatives for
safety-net hospitals; ensuring that broader delivery system improvements include 
safety-net hospitals and care delivery systems; and enhancing bundled payment
rates to account for socioeconomic risk factors.

PMID: 23289161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. BMC Health Serv Res. 2012 Apr 25;12:103. doi: 10.1186/1472-6963-12-103.

The health services burden of heart failure: an analysis using linked population 
health data-sets.

Robertson J(1), McElduff P, Pearson SA, Henry DA, Inder KJ, Attia JR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Public Health, The University of Newcastle, Newcastle, 
Australia. jane.robertson@newcastle.edu.au

Erratum in
    BMC Health Serv Res. 2013;13:179.

BACKGROUND: The burden of patients with heart failure on health care systems is
widely recognised, although there have been few attempts to quantify individual
patterns of care and differences in health service utilisation related to age,
socio-economic factors and the presence of co-morbidities. The aim of this study 
was to assess the typical profile, trajectory and resource use of a cohort of
Australian patients with heart failure using linked population-based,
patient-level data.
METHODS: Using hospital separations (Admitted Patient Data Collection) with death
registrations (Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages) for the period 2000-2007
we estimated age- and gender-specific rates of index admissions and readmissions,
risk factors for hospital readmission, mean length of stay (LOS), median survival
and bed-days occupied by patients with heart failure in New South Wales,
Australia.
RESULTS: We identified 29,161 index admissions for heart failure. Admission rates
increased with age, and were higher for males than females for all age groups.
Age-standardised rates decreased over time (256.7 to 237.7/100,000 for males and 
235.3 to 217.1/100,000 for females from 2002-3 to 2006-7; p = 0.0073 adjusted for
gender). Readmission rates (any cause) were 27% and 73% at 28-days and one year
respectively; readmission rates for heart failure were 11% and 32% respectively. 
All cause mortality was 10% and 28% at 28 days and one year. Increasing age was
associated with more heart failure readmissions, longer LOS and shorter median
survival. Increasing age, increasing Charlson comorbidity score and male gender
were risk factors for hospital readmission. Cohort members occupied 954,888
hospital bed-days during the study period (any cause); 383,646 bed-days were
attributed to heart failure admissions.
CONCLUSIONS: The rates of index admissions for heart failure decreased
significantly in both males and females over the study period. However, the
impact on acute care hospital beds was substantial, with heart failure patients
occupying almost 200,000 bed-days per year in NSW over the five year study
period. The strong age-related trends highlight the importance of stabilising
elderly patients before discharge and community-based outreach programs to better
manage heart failure and reduce readmissions.

PMCID: PMC3413515
PMID: 22533631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013 Apr 11;2(2):e000116. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000116.

Postdischarge environment following heart failure hospitalization: expanding the 
view of hospital readmission.

Hersh AM(1), Masoudi FA, Allen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, USA.

PMCID: PMC3647271
PMID: 23580604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Anesthesiology. 2008 Apr;108(4):559-67. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e31816725ef.

Impact of heart failure on patients undergoing major noncardiac surgery.

Hammill BG(1), Curtis LH, Bennett-Guerrero E, O'Connor CM, Jollis JG, Schulman
KA, Hernandez AF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical and Genetic Economics, Duke Clinical Research Institute,
Durham, North Carolina, USA.

Comment in
    Anesthesiology. 2008 Apr;108(4):551-2.

BACKGROUND: Changes in the demographics and epidemiology of patients with
cardiovascular comorbidities who undergo major noncardiac surgery require an
updated assessment of which patients are at greater risk of mortality or
readmission. The authors evaluated short-term outcomes among patients with heart 
failure, coronary artery disease (CAD), or neither who underwent major noncardiac
surgery.
METHODS: Patients were aged 65 and older, had Medicare fee-for-service coverage, 
and underwent 1 of 13 major noncardiac procedures from 2000 through 2004,
excluding patients with end-stage renal disease and patients who did not have at 
least 1 yr of Medicare fee-for-service eligibility before surgery. Main outcome
measures were operative mortality and 30-day all-cause readmission.
RESULTS: Of 159,327 procedures, 18% were performed in patients with heart failure
and 34% were performed in patients with CAD. Adjusted hazard ratios of mortality 
and readmission for patients with heart failure, compared with patients with
neither heart failure nor CAD, were 1.63 (95% confidence interval, 1.52-1.74) and
1.51 (95% confidence interval, 1.45-1.58), respectively. Adjusted hazard ratios
of mortality and readmission for patients with CAD, compared with patients with
neither heart failure nor CAD, were 1.08 (95% confidence interval, 1.01-1.16) and
1.16 (95% confidence interval, 1.12-1.20), respectively. These effects were
statistically significant. Patients with heart failure were at significantly
higher risk for both outcomes compared with patients with CAD.
CONCLUSIONS: Elderly patients with heart failure who undergo major surgical
procedures have substantially higher risks of operative mortality and hospital
readmission than other patients, including those with coronary disease, admitted 
for the same procedures. Improvements in perioperative care are needed for the
growing population of patients with heart failure undergoing major noncardiac
surgery.

PMID: 18362586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Med. 2003 Feb 1;114(2):112-9.

The prognostic importance of anemia in patients with heart failure.

Kosiborod M(1), Smith GL, Radford MJ, Foody JM, Krumholz HM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Physiologic studies have suggested that anemia could adversely affect the
cardiovascular condition of patients with heart failure. Yet, the prognostic
importance of this treatable condition is not well established by epidemiologic
studies. We sought to determine the prognostic value of hematocrit level in a
cohort of elderly patients hospitalized with heart failure. We studied a
consecutive sample of 2281 patients aged 65 years or older who had been admitted 
with a principal discharge diagnosis of heart failure. Multivariate Cox
proportional hazards regression was conducted to test whether hematocrit level
was an independent predictor of 1-year mortality and of hospital readmission. The
mean (+/- SD) age of the patients was 79 +/- 8 years; 58% (n = 1324) were women. 
Their median hematocrit was 38% (25th to 75th percentile, 33% to 42%). Lower
hematocrits were associated with a higher mortality. After adjusting for
demographic and clinical factors, each 1% lower hematocrit was associated with a 
2% greater 1-year mortality (P = 0.007). Compared with patients with a hematocrit
>42%, those with a hematocrit < or =27% had a 40% greater 1-year mortality
(hazard ratio [HR] = 1.40; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.02 to 1.92; P = 0.04).
This increased risk was similar to that conferred by traditional risk factors,
including a left ventricular ejection fraction < or =20% (HR = 1.50; 95% CI: 1.20
to 1.86). Lower hematocrits were also associated with a greater risk of hospital 
readmission. Anemia is associated with an increased risk of death and
rehospitalization in older patients with heart failure. Whether anemia is a
direct cause of worse outcomes, or a marker for other causal factors, is not
known.

PMID: 12586230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2007 May;9(5):518-24. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Hyperuricaemia and long-term outcome after hospital discharge in acute heart
failure patients.

Pascual-Figal DA(1), Hurtado-Martínez JA, Redondo B, Antolinos MJ, Ruiperez JA,
Valdes M.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Department, University Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, University
of Murcia, Spain. dapascual@servicam.com

Comment in
    Eur J Heart Fail. 2007 May;9(5):437-9.

BACKGROUND: Uric acid (UA) may be involved in chronic heart failure (HF)
pathogenesis, entailing a worse outcome. The purpose of this study was to examine
the role of hyperuricaemia as a prognostic marker after hospital discharge in
acute HF patients.
METHODS: We studied 212 patients consecutively discharged after an episode of
acute HF with LVEF<40%. Blood samples for UA measurement were extracted in the
morning prior to discharge. The evaluated endpoints were death and new HF
hospitalization.
RESULTS: Mean UA levels were 7.4+/-2.4 mg/dl (range 1.6 to 16 mg/dl), with 127
(60%) of patients being within the range of hyperuricaemia. Hyperuricaemia was
associated with a higher risk of death (n=48) (HR 2.0, 95% CI 1.1-3.9, p=0.028), 
new HF readmission (n=67) (HR 1.8, 95% CI 1.1-3.1, p=0.023) and the combined
event (n=100) (HR 1.9, 95% CI 1.2-2.9, p=0.004). At 24 months, cumulative
event-free survival was lower in the two higher UA quartiles (36.9% and 40.7% vs.
63.5% and 59.5%, log rank=0.006). After adjustment for potential confounders,
hyperuricaemia remains an independent risk factor for adverse outcomes (HR 1.6,
95% CI 1.1-2.6, p=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: In hospitalized patients with acute HF and LV systolic dysfunction, 
hyperuricaemia is a long-term prognostic marker for death and/or new HF
readmission.

PMID: 17064961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2009 Nov;2(6):558-65. doi:
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.108.826784. Epub 2009 Sep 1.

Mortality and readmission for patients with heart failure among U.S. News & World
Report's top heart hospitals.

Mulvey GK(1), Wang Y, Lin Z, Wang OJ, Chen J, Keenan PS, Drye EE, Rathore SS,
Normand SL, Krumholz HM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA.

BACKGROUND: The rankings of "America's Best Hospitals" by U.S. News & World
Report are influential, but the performance of ranked hospitals in caring for
patients with routine cardiac conditions such as heart failure is not known.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using hierarchical regression models based on medical
administrative data from the period July 1, 2005, to June 30, 2006, we calculated
risk-standardized mortality rates and risk-standardized readmission rates for
ranked and nonranked hospitals in the treatment of heart failure. The mortality
analysis examined 14 813 patients in 50 ranked hospitals and 409 806 patients in 
4761 nonranked hospitals. The readmission analysis included 16 641 patients in 50
ranked hospitals and 458 473 patients in 4627 nonranked hospitals. Mean 30-day
risk-standardized mortality rates were lower in ranked versus nonranked hospitals
(10.1% versus 11.2%, P<0.01), whereas mean 30-day risk-standardized readmission
rates were no different between ranked and nonranked hospitals (23.6% versus
23.8%, P=0.40). The 30-day risk-standardized mortality rates varied widely for
both ranked and nonranked hospitals, ranging from 7.9% to 12.4% for ranked
hospitals and from 7.1% to 17.5% for nonranked hospitals. The 30-day
risk-standardized readmission rates also spanned a large range, from 18.7% to
29.3% for ranked hospitals and from 19.2% to 29.8% for nonranked hospitals.
CONCLUSIONS: Hospitals ranked by U.S. News & World Report as "America's Best
Hospitals" in "Heart & Heart Surgery" are more likely than nonranked hospitals to
have a significantly lower than expected 30-day mortality rate, but there was
much overlap in performance. For readmission, the rates were similar in ranked
and nonranked hospitals.

PMID: 20031893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Data Strateg Benchmarks. 2000 Apr;4(4):53-4.

Readmission analysis leads to heart failure intervention that cuts returns to
hospital.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 11066658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Intern Med J. 2005 May;35(5):296-9.

Readmission patterns in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
chronic heart failure and diabetes mellitus: an administrative dataset analysis.

Brand C(1), Sundararajan V, Jones C, Hutchinson A, Campbell D.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Epidemiology and Health Services Evaluation Unit, Royal Melbourne
Hospital, Victoria, Australia. caroline.brand@mh.org.au

Comprehensive disease management programmes for chronic disease aim to improve
patient outcomes and reduce health-care utilization. Readmission rates are often 
used as an outcome measure of effectiveness. This study aimed to document
readmission rates, and risk for early and late readmission, for patients
discharged from the Royal Melbourne Hospital with a disease diagnosis of chronic 
heart failure (CHF), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or diabetes
mellitus compared to those with other general medical conditions. Eighty five
(8.6%) of patients were readmitted within 28 days and 183 (20.8%) were readmitted
between 29 and 180 days. No risk factors for early readmission were identified.
Patients with a primary disease diagnosis of CHF and COPD are at increased risk
of late readmissions (29-180 days).

PMID: 15845113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Patient Educ Couns. 2012 Feb;86(2):233-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2011.05.019. Epub
2011 Jun 25.

Relationship between improvements in heart failure patient disease specific
knowledge and clinical events as part of a randomized controlled trial.

Kommuri NV(1), Johnson ML, Koelling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the changes in performance on heart failure knowledge
assessments administered before and after discharge education.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized controlled trial comparing the effects of a
1-h, one-on-one teaching session with a nurse educator to the standard discharge 
process in patients with systolic heart failure. Patients completed a 30 point
heart failure knowledge questionnaire (HFKQ) prior to and 3 months after the
education intervention.
RESULTS: Patients randomized to the nurse education intervention (n=113)
demonstrated significantly higher total HFKQ score increases compared to patients
receiving the standard discharge process (n=114) (median, IQR 1, 0 to 4 vs 0, -2 
to 2, p=0.007). Patients experiencing death or rehospitalization in the
subsequent 6 months were found to have significantly lower HFKQ scores (10, 7 to 
12 vs 11, 8 to 13, p=0.002) compared to patients without a clinical event.
CONCLUSION: Heart failure nurse education at the time of hospital discharge
results in improved patient knowledge and reduced risk of readmission.
PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: Health care personnel should encourage education sessions 
for heart failure patients. Resources possibly need to be allocated for nurse led
education sessions in heart failure patients as it improves outcomes and
knowledge.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21705170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ J. 2010 Mar;74(3):490-5. Epub 2010 Jan 7.

Coronary score adds prognostic information for patients with acute coronary
syndrome.

Huang G(1), Zhao JL, Du H, Lan XB, Yin YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Second People's Hospital of Chengdu, China.

Comment in
    Circ J. 2010 Mar;74(3):430-1.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the present study was to explore the association of 3
coronary scores with major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) in patients with 
acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
METHODS AND RESULTS: The 958 consecutive patients with ACS were followed up until
either MACE or 31(st) December 2008 occurred; 257 patients reached clinical
endpoints. Cox regression analysis demonstrated that the Gensini score was
associated with 90-day MACE (relative risk (RR) 1.021, P=0.004), 6-month MACE (RR
1.021, P<0.001), 1-year MACE (RR 1.017, P=0.002), and MACE during follow-up (RR
1.010, P=0.040). Leaman score was associated with 90-day MACE (RR 1.094,
P=0.014), 6-month MACE (RR 1.098, P=0.002), and 1-year MACE (RR 1.074, P=0.009). 
The logistic regression analysis demonstrated that the Gensini score (odds ratio 
(OR) 1.037, P=0.001), Leaman score (OR 1.165, P=0.007) and American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) score (OR 1.235, P=0.025) were
all associated with cardiogenic death.
CONCLUSIONS: The Gensini score provides more valuable prognostic information on
cardiovascular risk than either the Leaman or ACC/AHA score in patients with ACS.

PMID: 20057158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Med Clin (Barc). 2004 Feb 28;122(7):275.

[Heart failure in the elderly: a frequent cause of readmission].

[Article in Spanish]

Chivite Guillén D, Formiga Pérez F, Morera Casaponsa M, Pujol Farriols R.

PMID: 15012879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Cardiol. 2002 Apr;25(4):149-52.

Clinical presentation, hospital length of stay, and readmission rate in patients 
with heart failure with preserved and decreased left ventricular systolic
function.

Malki Q(1), Sharma ND, Afzal A, Ananthsubramaniam K, Abbas A, Jacobson G, Jafri
S.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA.

BACKGROUND: Congestive heart failure is the leading cause of hospital admissions 
for adults in the United States. To our knowledge, there are limited data
comparing the clinical presentation, hospital length of stay, and readmission in 
patients with preserved and decreased left ventricular (LV) systolic function.
HYPOTHESIS: The goal of the study was to determine whether there are differences 
in clinical presentation, hospital length of stay, and readmission in patients
with preserved (> or = 50%) and reduced (< 50%) systolic function.
METHODS: We prospectively evaluated 187 patients admitted with congestive heart
failure confirmed by the presence of pulmonary vascular congestion on chest
x-ray, and with recent (< 6 months) documentation of LV systolic function by
two-dimensional echocardiography. History and physical examination findings,
patient demographics, comorbidities, discharge medications, and length of
hospital stay data were documented. Readmission rate over a 6-month follow-up
period was also documented.
RESULTS: Of the 187 patients, 130 (70%) patients had an ejection fraction (EF)
<50%, and 57 (30%) patients had an EF > or = 50%. Patients with EF < 50% were
more likely to be men (54 vs. 37%, p = 0.03). African Americans (79 vs. 60%, p = 
0.007), had a higher prevalence of previous stroke (17 vs. 5%, p = 0.03), and
were more likely to carry no medical insurance at the time of admission (14 vs.
2%, p = 0.01) and to be discharged on digoxin (60 vs.30%, p<0.001). There were no
significant differences in symptoms (exertional dyspnea, rest dyspnea, orthopnea,
or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea), or in physical examination findings (S3, S4,
elevated jugular venous pressure, rales, or peripheral edema). According to chest
x-ray, patients with EF <50% had more frequent cardiomegaly (88 vs. 72% p =
0.008), but there were no differences in the presence of pleural effusion or
pulmonary vascular congestion (p = NS). The mean length of stay was 5.9 and 5.2
days, respectively (p = 0.34). During the 6-month follow-up period, the
readmission rates were 33% (43 patients) and 26% (15 patients), respectively (p =
0.36).
CONCLUSION: The clinical presentation, hospital length of stay, and readmission
rate for congestive heart failure are similar in patients with preserved and
decreased LV systolic function.

PMID: 12000071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Cardiology. 1998 Oct;90(2):110-4.

Predictors of death and other cardiac events within 2 years after coronary artery
bypass grafting.

Herlitz J(1), Brandrup-Wognsen G, Karlsson T, Karlson B, Haglid M, Sjöland H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden.

RESULTS: In 1,841 patients who underwent coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
we evaluated risk indicators for death and other cardiac events during 2 years of
follow-up. Independent predictors of death were: a history of congestive heart
failure, diabetes mellitus and renal dysfunction prior to CABG. Independent
predictors of death, acute myocardial infarction (AMI), CABG or percutaneous
transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) were: a small body surface area, a
history of congestive heart failure, diabetes mellitus and smoking prior to CABG.
Independent predictors of death, AMI, CABG, PTCA or rehospitalization for a
cardiac reason were: angina functional class, previous AMI, a history of
congestive heart failure and renal dysfunction prior to CABG.
CONCLUSION: When using various definitions of a cardiac event after CABG, various
risk indicators for death or such an event can be found. Our data suggest that
anamnestic information prior to CABG indicating a depressed myocardial function
or severe myocardial ischemia are more important predictors of outcome than the
information gained from cardioangiography.

PMID: 9778547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2006 Aug;7(8):614-22.

Lack of improvement of clinical outcomes by a low-cost, hospital-based heart
failure management programme.

Nucifora G(1), Albanese MC, De Biaggio P, Caliandro D, Gregori D, Goss P, Miani
D, Fresco C, Rossi P, Bulfoni A, Fioretti PM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Unit, Cardiopulmonary Science Department, S. Maria della
Misericordia Hospital, Udine, Italy. gnucifora@cardionet.it

OBJECTIVE: Heart failure (HF) is a major health problem resulting in a high
financial burden for the healthcare system. Many previous HF management
programmes reduced adverse clinical outcomes and costs, but they usually involved
several professional figures as well as huge investments, requiring resources and
budgets not often available in our healthcare system. We evaluated the effects of
our HF management programme, which included patient education and regular
outpatient contact with the HF team, on re-hospitalisation and death, optimising 
the few resources already available at our hospital.
METHODS: Two hundred consecutive patients admitted to the internal medicine
department with a diagnosis of HF were randomised to the intervention group
(nurse-led education programme, facilitated telephone communication and follow-up
visits with an internist at 15 days, 1 and 6 months) or to the usual care group
(follow-up by their primary care physician). The primary endpoints were all-cause
readmissions and all-cause deaths during the 6-month post-discharge period.
RESULTS: There were 81 all-cause hospital readmissions in the intervention group 
and 82 in the control group (P = NS). Fourteen patients (14%) in the intervention
group and eight patients (8%) in the control group died during the study period
(P = NS). Unplanned outpatient visits were less frequent in the intervention
group than in the control group (39 [28%] versus 99 [72%], P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The present low-cost HF management programme reduced unplanned
outpatient visits but proved ineffective in reducing subsequent readmissions and 
in improving clinical status. More intense follow-up monitoring and more
resources are needed to achieve better results.

PMID: 16858241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circulation. 2014 May 20;129(20):2021-30. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.000417.
Epub 2014 Mar 7.

Impact of cardiac resynchronization therapy on hospitalizations in the
Resynchronization-Defibrillation for Ambulatory Heart Failure trial.

Gillis AM(1), Kerr CR(2), Philippon F(2), Newton G(2), Talajic M(2), Froeschl
M(2), Froeschl S(2), Swiggum E(2), Yetisir E(2), Wells GA(2), Tang AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cardiac Sciences, University of Calgary, Libin
Cardiovascular Institute of Alberta, Calgary, AB, Canada (A.M.B.); St. Paul's
Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada (C.R.K.); Quebec Heart and Lung Institute, Sainte
Foy, QC, Canada (F.P.); Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada (G.N.);
Montreal Heart Institute and Université de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada (M.T.);
University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada (M.F., E.Y., G.A.W.,
A.S.T.); University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada (S.F.); and Island Medical
Program, University of British Columbia, Victoria, BC, Canada (E.S., A.S.T.).
amgillis@ucalgary.ca. (2)From the Department of Cardiac Sciences, University of
Calgary, Libin Cardiovascular Institute of Alberta, Calgary, AB, Canada (A.M.B.);
St. Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada (C.R.K.); Quebec Heart and Lung
Institute, Sainte Foy, QC, Canada (F.P.); Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON,
Canada (G.N.); Montreal Heart Institute and Université de Montreal, Montreal, QC,
Canada (M.T.); University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada (M.F.,
E.Y., G.A.W., A.S.T.); University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada (S.F.); and
Island Medical Program, University of British Columbia, Victoria, BC, Canada
(E.S., A.S.T.).

BACKGROUND: This study reports the impact of cardiac resynchronization therapy
(CRT) on hospitalizations in patients randomized to implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) or ICD-CRT in the
Resynchronization-Defibrillation for Ambulatory Heart Failure Trial (RAFT).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Hospitalization rates and lengths of hospital stay were
compared between the 2 groups. At the 18-month follow-up, the numbers of patients
hospitalized for any cause were similar in the ICD (n=351, 38.8%) and ICD-CRT
(n=331, 30.0%) groups. The number of patients hospitalized for heart failure was 
significantly lower in the ICD-CRT (n=101, 11.3%) compared with the ICD (n=141,
15.6%; P=0.003) group. The number of patients hospitalized for a device-related
indication was similar in the ICD-CRT group (n=147, 16.4%) and ICD group (n=126, 
13.9%; P=0.148). The total number of hospitalizations for any cause (n=1448
versus n=1553; P=0.042), any cardiovascular cause (n=667 versus n=790; P=0.017), 
and any heart failure cause (n=385 versus n=505; P<0.0001) was significantly
lower in ICD-CRT group compared with the ICD group, whereas the number of
hospitalizations for device-related causes was significantly higher in the
ICD-CRT group compared with the ICD group (246 versus 159; P<0.001). Although the
reduction in hospitalizations for heart failure in the CRT-ICD group was offset
by an increased number of hospitalizations for device-related indications, the
length of hospital stay for any cause was significantly shorter in the ICD-CRT
group (8.83±13.30 days) compared with the ICD group (9.59±14.40 days; P=0.005).
CONCLUSION: ICD-CRT therapy significantly reduces hospitalizations and total days
in hospital in patients with New York Heart Association class II/III heart
failure compared with ICD therapy despite increased admissions for device-related
indications.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION URL: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique
identifier: NCT00251251.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 24610807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2010 Nov;3(6):726-45. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.109.920298.

Renal function, health outcomes, and resource utilization in acute heart failure:
a systematic review.

Butler J(1), Chirovsky D, Phatak H, McNeill A, Cody R.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Emory University Hospital, 1365 Clifton Road NE, Atlanta,
GA 30322, USA. javed.butler@emory.edu

PMID: 21081740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Ann Emerg Med. 2010 Sep;56(3):253-7. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2010.01.031. Epub
2010 Feb 26.

Postdischarge adverse events for 1-day hospital admissions in older adults
admitted from the emergency department.

Pines JM(1), Mongelluzzo J, Hilton JA, Hollander JE, Shofer FS, Souder J,
Synnestvedt M, Weiner MG, Datner EM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health and Health Services, Department of Emergency Medicine,
George Washington University, 2121 K Street NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA.
jesse.pines@gmail.com

Comment in
    Ann Emerg Med. 2010 Sep;56(3):258-60.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: We assess hospital readmission and death within 60 days in older
adults admitted from the emergency department (ED) and discharged by an inpatient
service within 24 hours.
METHODS: This was a retrospective review of ED patients aged 64 years or older,
admitted from 2 hospitals (2004 to 2006), who were discharged home within 24
hours. Excluded were in-hospital deaths, observation admissions, transfers to
other facilities, patients who left against medical advice, and hospice patients.
Outcomes were 72-hour and 30-day readmissions and postdischarge deaths that
occurred within 60 days of ED admission. Logistic regression was used to assess
for predictors of readmission. A chart review of deaths after discharge was
performed to assess for potential contributors to adverse outcomes.
RESULTS: A total of 1,470 admissions met inclusion criteria as 1-day admissions. 
Of those, 22 (1.5%) patients returned for hospital readmission within 72 hours
and 156 (10.6%) within 30 days of discharge. In the multivariable analysis,
previous admissions (odds ratio [OR] 1.3; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.1 to
1.4) and an admission diagnosis of heart failure (OR 2.2; 95% CI 1.0 to 5.0) were
associated with 30-day readmission. In 841 individual patients with greater than 
or equal to one 1-day admission, there were 15 deaths (1.8%) within 60 days. Of
those, 11 (73%) patients had abnormal ED ECG results, 6 (40%) were ruled out for 
acute myocardial infarction while hospitalized, and 3 (20%) had definitive
follow-up arranged at discharge.
CONCLUSION: One-day admissions in hospitalized older adults through the ED do not
represent a group at low risk for postdischarge adverse outcomes.

Copyright (c) 2009. Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMID: 20189266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Kardiologiia. 2009;49(6):31-5.

[Repetitive hospitalizations of patients with chronic heart failure according to 
data of one year follow-up study].

[Article in Russian]

Gladkikh AS, Savina NM, Kudinova SP, Baĭdina OI, Sidorenko BA.

Patients with chronic heart failure (CHF) represent a group with high risk of
repetitive hospitalizations. In order to assess frequency of repetitive
hospitalizations and elucidate their risk factors we included in this study 962
patients with stage IIA-III and functional class II-IV CHF hospitalized in a
multiprofile hospital once or repeatedly during 1 year. Rate of
rehospitalizations during 1 year was 59%. The following factors of risk of
rehospitalizations were revealed: admission because of progression of CHF,
history of myocardial infarction, atrial fibrillation, systolic left ventricular 
dysfunction, hyperuricemia, and hyperglycemia.

PMID: 19656092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Vessels. 2010 May;25(3):217-22. doi: 10.1007/s00380-009-1194-6. Epub 2010
May 29.

Elevated troponin T on discharge predicts poor outcome of decompensated heart
failure.

Koide K(1), Yoshikawa T, Nagatomo Y, Kohsaka S, Anzai T, Meguro T, Ogawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine, Keio University School of
Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Persistent elevation of cardiac troponin T (cTnT) predicts an adverse clinical
outcome in patients with chronic heart failure (HF), but the underlying
mechanisms remain to be determined. We investigated the association between
predischarge cTnT elevation and coexistent pathophysiology in patients with
decompensated HF. Plasma cTnT levels were determined before discharge in 170
patients with decompensated HF. We divided the patients into a group that was
positive for cTnT [cTnT(+) group, n = 40] and a group that was negative for cTnT 
[cTnT(-) group, n = 130]. Multivariate analysis showed that use of beta-blocker
therapy (odds ratio [OR] = 0.236, P = 0.003), an elevated high-sensitivity
C-reactive protein (hsCRP) level (OR = 3.731, P = 0.006), a high brain
natriuretic peptide (BNP) level (OR = 3.570, P = 0.007), diabetes (OR = 3.090, P 
= 0.018), and anemia (OR = 2.330, P = 0.047) were independently associated with
cTnT positivity. During a mean follow-up period of 441 days after discharge,
total mortality (P < 0.001), cardiac death (P < 0.001), and exacerbation of HF
requiring hospitalization (P = 0.007) were all more common in the cTnT(+) group
than in the cTnT(-) group. Cox proportional hazards analysis showed that cTnT
positivity was an independent predictor of total mortality (hazard ratio = 5.008,
P = 0.004) in an age- and gender-matched model. Elevation of cTnT during
convalescence was associated with lack of beta-blocker therapy, a high hsCRP
level at discharge, a high BNP level at discharge, diabetes, and anemia, and a
worse clinical outcome in patients with decompensated HF.

PMID: 20512449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Natl Med Assoc. 2010 Oct;102(10):898-905.

Effect of compliance with quality performance measures for heart failure on
clinical outcomes in high-risk patients.

Mansi IA(1), Shi R, Khan M, Huang J, Carden D.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Service, Brooke Army Medical Center, 3851 Roger Brooke Dr., 
San Antonio, TX 78234-6200, USA. ishak.mansi@us.army.mil

BACKGROUND: Although effects of the Joint Commission on Accreditation of
Healthcare Organizations' (TJC) performance measures on national trends in
patient outcomes have been reported, little information exists on the effects of 
these quality measures on patient outcomes in individual centers caring for
high-risk patient populations.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the effects of compliance with TJC core quality measures
for heart failure on patient outcomes at a university hospital caring for
high-risk patients.
METHODS: We reviewed data collected for TJC in patients admitted with heart
failure at a university hospital serving an indigent population in Louisiana.
Patients were divided based on compliance with TJC measures into
quality-compliant or quality-deficient groups. Of 646 reviewed records, 542,
representing 357 patients, were included in the analysis. There were 193 patients
in the quality-compliant and 164 in the quality-deficient group. Outcome measures
included rate of heart failure admission/year and readmission within 90 days.
Multivariate logistic and linear regression analyses were performed to identify
independent associations between patient characteristics and heart failure
admission.
RESULTS: Multiple linear regression analysis demonstrated higher rates of heart
failure admission/year, and multiple logistic regression revealed higher
readmissions at 90 days in the quality-compliant group (parameter estimate,
0.203; p = .02; odds ratio, 2.82; 95% confidence interval, 1.46-5.44,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: Compliance with TJC quality measures for heart failure at a
university hospital in Louisiana was associated with higher readmission rates for
heart failure. Several factors may explain this trend, including patient
characteristics and focus on national reporting benchmarks rather than
patient-centered health care.

PMID: 21053704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Med Care. 2012 May;50(5):406-9. doi: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e318245a0f9.

Regional associations between Medicare Advantage penetration and administrative
claims-based measures of hospital outcomes.

Kulkarni VT(1), Shah SJ, Bernheim SM, Wang Y, Normand SL, Han LF, Rapp MT, Drye
EE, Krumholz HM.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

BACKGROUND: Risk-standardized measures of hospital outcomes reported by the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services include Medicare fee-for-service (FFS)
patients and exclude Medicare Advantage (MA) patients due to data availability.
MA penetration varies greatly nationwide and seems to be associated with
increased FFS population risk. Whether variation in MA penetration affects the
performance on the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service measures is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the MA penetration rate is associated with
outcomes measures based on FFS patients.
RESEARCH DESIGN: In this retrospective study, 2008 MA penetration was estimated
at the Hospital Referral Region (HRR) level. Risk-standardized mortality rates
and risk-standardized readmission rates for heart failure, acute myocardial
infarction, and pneumonia from 2006 to 2008 were estimated among HRRs, along with
several markers of FFS population risk. Weighted linear regression was used to
test the association between each of these variables and MA penetration among
HRRs.
RESULTS: Among 304 HRRs, MA penetration varied greatly (median, 17.0%; range,
2.1%-56.6%). Although MA penetration was significantly (P<0.05) associated with 5
of the 6 markers of FFS population risk, MA penetration was insignificantly
(P≥0.05) associated with 5 of 6 hospital outcome measures.
CONCLUSION: Risk-standardized mortality rates and risk-standardized readmission
rates for heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, and pneumonia do not seem
to differ systematically with MA penetration, lending support to the widespread
use of these measures even in areas of high MA penetration.

PMID: 22456113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart. 2005 Jun;91(6):754-8.

Increased risk of heart failure as a consequence of perioperative myocardial
injury after coronary artery bypass grafting.

Steuer J(1), Granath F, de Faire U, Ekbom A, Ståhle E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University Hospital, SE-751 85 Uppsala, 
Sweden. johnny.steuer@surgsci.uu.se

OBJECTIVE: To analyse the relation between perioperative myocardial injury (PMI) 
and the risk of subsequent heart failure after coronary artery bypass grafting
(CABG).
DESIGN AND SETTING: Clinical data were documented prospectively in all patients
and stored in a computer. All hospital readmissions were identified and the
registered primary diagnoses were analysed. Survival information on all patients 
was obtained by use of combined registers. The study was carried out at the
cardiac surgical referral centre of University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
PATIENTS: 7493 patients discharged alive after primary CABG between 1987 and 1996
were followed up until the first hospital readmission for heart failure, death,
or 31 December 1996 was reached.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Hospital readmission for heart failure or late mortality.
RESULTS: Of the patients studied 576 (7.7%) were readmitted for heart failure.
Actuarial freedom from readmission for heart failure after four years was 93%,
and after seven years, 89%. Of the 576 patients, 114 (20%) had had PMI, which
increased the risk of heart failure independently (hazard ratio (HR) 2.3, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.8 to 2.8). Increased age, female sex, diabetes,
previous myocardial infarction, dyspnoea, preoperative atrial fibrillation, left 
ventricular dysfunction, and triple vessel disease were independent risk factors 
for heart failure. The use of an internal mammary artery decreased the risk. PMI 
implied increased mortality (HR 1.4, 95% CI 1.1 to 1.8). Late mortality was
greatly increased in patients readmitted for heart failure.
CONCLUSION: PMI increased the risk of heart failure and late death after CABG,
and heart failure had a notable adverse effect on late survival.

PMCID: PMC1768944
PMID: 15894769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2013 May 1;6(3):457-65. doi:
10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.112.000230. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Prognostic value of cardiac time intervals by tissue Doppler imaging M-mode in
patients with acute ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction treated with
primary percutaneous coronary intervention.

Biering-Sørensen T(1), Mogelvang R, Søgaard P, Pedersen SH, Galatius S, Jørgensen
PG, Jensen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark. tor.biering@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Color tissue Doppler imaging M-mode through the mitral leaflet is an 
easy and precise method to estimate all cardiac time intervals from 1 cardiac
cycle and thereby obtain the myocardial performance index (MPI). However, the
prognostic value of the cardiac time intervals and the MPI assessed by color
tissue Doppler imaging M-mode through the mitral leaflet in patients with
ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (MI) is unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In total, 391 patients were admitted with an
ST-segment-elevation MI, treated with primary percutaneous coronary intervention,
and examined by echocardiography a median of 2 days after the
ST-segment-elevation MI. Outcome was assessed according to death (n=33),
hospitalization with heart failure (n=53), or new MI (n=25). Follow-up time was a
median of 25 months. The population was stratified according to tertiles of the
MPI. The risk of new MI, being admitted with congestive heart failure or death,
increased with increasing tertile of MPI, being ≈3 times as high for the third
tertile compared with the first tertile (hazard ratio, 2.8; 95% confidence
interval, 1.7-4.7; P<0.001). MPI provided independent prognostic information in a
multivariable Cox regression model adjusted for age, sex, previous MI, peak
troponin, and systolic and diastolic echocardiographic parameters, with a hazard 
ratio of 1.24 (P=0.005) for the combined end point per each 0.1 increase in MPI.
CONCLUSIONS: MPI assessed by tissue Doppler imaging M-mode is a simple and
reproducible measure that provides independent prognostic information, regardless
of rhythm, incremental to conventional and novel echocardiographic parameters of 
systolic and diastolic function in patients with ST-segment-elevation MI treated 
with primary percutaneous coronary intervention.

PMID: 23536267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Lung. 2014 Jul-Aug;43(4):269. doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2014.04.010. Epub 2014 
May 10.

Is there a "one size fits all" strategy for reducing heart failure readmissions?

Lewis CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)American Association of Heart Failure Nurses, Mount Laurel, NJ, USA.
Electronic address: connie.m.lewis@vanderbilt.edu.

PMID: 24819690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2013 Mar;24(3):316-22. doi: 10.1111/jce.12037. Epub 
2012 Dec 4.

Functional response to cardiac resynchronization therapy is associated with
improved clinical outcome and absence of appropriate shocks.

Van Boven N(1), Bogaard K, Ruiter J, Kimman G, Theuns D, Kardys I, Umans V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Medical Centre Alkmaar (MCA), Alkmaar, The
Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: We evaluated clinical outcome and incidence of (in)appropriate
shocks in consecutive chronic heart failure (CHF) patients treated with CRT with 
a defibrillator (CRT-D) according to functional response status. Furthermore, we 
investigated which factors predict such functional response.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In a large teaching hospital, 179 consecutive CHF patients
received CRT-D in 2005-2010. Patients were considered functional responders if
left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) increased to ≥ 35% postimplantation.
Analysis was performed on 142 patients, who had CRT-D as primary prevention,
complete data and a baseline LVEF <35%. Endpoints consisted of all-cause
mortality, heart failure (HF) hospitalizations, appropriate shocks and
inappropriate shocks. Median follow-up was 3.0 years (interquartile range [IQR]
1.6-4.4) and median baseline LVEF was 20% (IQR 18-25%). The functional
response-group consisted of 42 patients. In this group no patients died, none
were hospitalized for HF, none received appropriate shocks and 3 patients (7.1%) 
received ≥ 1 inappropriate shocks. In comparison, the functional nonresponse
group consisted of 100 patients, of whom 22 (22%) died (P = 0.003), 17 (17%) were
hospitalized for HF (P = 0.007), 17 (17%) had ≥ 1 appropriate shocks (P = 0.003) 
and 8 (8.1%) received ≥ 1 inappropriate shocks (P = 0.78). Multivariable analysis
showed that left bundle branch block (LBBB), QRS duration ≥ 150 milliseconds and 
no need for diuretics at baseline are independent predictors of functional
response.
CONCLUSION: Functional responders to CRT have a good prognosis and rarely need
ICD therapy. LBBB, QRS duration ≥ 150 milliseconds and lack of chronic diuretic
use predict functional response.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23210664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Prog Cardiovasc Nurs. 1996 Winter;11(1):15-20.

Readmission of older heart failure patients.

Jaarsma T(1), Halfens RJ, Huijer-Abu Saad H.

Author information: 
(1)University of Limburg, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

The purpose of this article is to provide an overview of the literature on
factors associated with hospital readmission of older heart failure patients.
Important factors reported to be related to rehospitalization are
sociodemographic and medical factors, premature discharge, failing support
system, medication-related problems and noncompliance. To prevent readmission,
interventions in the area of discharge planning, patient education and follow-up 
are recommended.

PMID: 8657705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Herzschrittmacherther Elektrophysiol. 2005 Sep;16(3):150-8.

[Monitoring multiple cardiovascular paramaters using telemedicine in patients
with chronic heart failure].

[Article in German]

Oeff M(1), Kotsch P, Gösswald A, Wolf U.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Innere Medizin I, Städtisches Klinikum Brandenburg, Hochstrasse 29,
14770 Brandenburg. oeff@klinikum-brandenburg.de

Progression of chronic heart failure depends on various additional
pathophysiologic factors like blood pressure, arrhythmias, congestion. Early
detection of any alteration using telemonitoring of multiple vital parameters may
avoid severe decompensation requiring hospital admission. The feasibility and the
clinical outcome using a new telemonitoring device for recording multiple vital
parameters and allowing communication on individual state of health is
investigated. Twenty-four patients with chronic heart failure (mean age 65 years,
mean LV ejection fraction 35%) requiring at least one hospital admission during
the past year were investigated. Twice a day, the vital-parameters were measured 
(weight, blood pressure, heart rate and rhythm, oxygen saturation, respiration
rate) and patients information on well being, shortness of breath, medication,
and request for contact were received. Intra-individual comparison was carried
out between the 12 month before inclusion in this study and 12 month under
telemonitoring surveillance (extrapolated, if necessary). Performing over 10 500 
measurements during 5751 patient days, critical events were diagnosed for 55
events concerning relative weight gain (43 episodes), blood pressure (6),
decrease in oxygen saturation (3), new onset of atrial fibrillation with
tachyarrhymia (3). Of these, 45 events were controlled on an outpatient basis by 
changing medication or external cardioversion. Only 10 patients required
re-admission. Thus, the number of admission to the hospital could be reduced by
62%, those of days spent in hospital by 69%. Non-invasive telemonitoring of
multiple vital parameters combined with patients statements on their health
condition and out-patient treatment on the basis of these findings is found to be
an effective and reliable approach to avoid hospital readmission for patients
with chronic heart failure.

PMID: 16177941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circulation. 2012 Oct 30;126(18):2200-7. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.109330. 
Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Outcomes of Medicare beneficiaries undergoing catheter ablation for atrial
fibrillation.

Piccini JP(1), Sinner MF, Greiner MA, Hammill BG, Fontes JD, Daubert JP, Ellinor 
PT, Hernandez AF, Walkey AJ, Heckbert SR, Benjamin EJ, Curtis LH.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, PO Box 17969, Durham, NC 27715, USA.

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation is common among older persons. Catheter ablation 
is increasingly used in patients for whom medical therapy has failed.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study of all
fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries ≥65 years of age who underwent catheter
ablation for atrial fibrillation between July 1, 2007, and December 31, 2009. The
main outcome measures were major complications within 30 days and mortality,
heart failure, stroke, hospitalization, and repeat ablation within 1 year. A
total of 15 423 patients underwent catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation.
Mean age was 72 years; 41% were women; and >95% were white. For every 1000
procedures, there were 17 cases of hemopericardium requiring intervention, 8
cases of stroke, and 8 deaths within 30 days. More than 40% of patients required 
hospitalization within 1 year; however, atrial fibrillation or flutter was the
primary discharge diagnosis in only 38.4% of cases. Eleven percent of patients
underwent repeat ablation within 1 year. Renal impairment (hazard ratio, 2.07;
95% confidence interval, 1.66-2.58), age ≥80 years (hazard ratio, 3.09; 95%
confidence interval, 2.32-4.11), and heart failure (hazard ratio, 2.54; 95%
confidence interval, 2.07-3.13) were major risk factors for 1-year mortality.
Advanced age was a major risk factor for all adverse outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Major complications after catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation 
were associated with advanced age but were fairly infrequent. Few patients
underwent repeat ablation. Randomized trials are needed to inform risk-benefit
calculations for older persons with drug-refractory, symptomatic atrial
fibrillation.

PMCID: PMC3500836
PMID: 23019293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Health Serv Res. 2015 Feb;50(1):40-57. doi: 10.1111/1475-6773.12207. Epub 2014
Jul 15.

What is the value of adding Medicare data in estimating VA hospital readmission
rates?

O'Brien WJ(1), Chen Q, Mull HJ, Shwartz M, Borzecki AM, Hanchate A, Rosen AK.

Author information: 
(1)VA Boston Healthcare System - Center for Healthcare Organization and
Implementation Research, Boston, MA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effects of including diagnostic and utilization data 
from a secondary payer on readmission rates and hospital profiles.
DATA SOURCES/STUDY SETTING: Veterans Health Administration (VA) and Medicare
inpatient and outpatient administrative data for veterans discharged from 153 VA 
hospitals during FY 2008-2010 with a principal diagnosis of acute myocardial
infarction, heart failure, or pneumonia.
STUDY DESIGN: We estimated hospital-level risk-standardized readmission rates
derived using VA data only. We then used data from both VA and Medicare to
reestimate readmission rates and compared hospital profiles using two methods:
Hospital Compare and the CMS implementation of the Hospital Readmissions
Reduction Program (HRRP).
DATA COLLECTION/EXTRACTION METHODS: Retrospective data analysis using VA hospital
discharge and outpatient data matched with Medicare fee-for-service claims by
scrambled Social Security numbers.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Less than 2 percent of hospitals in any cohort were
classified discordantly by the Hospital Compare method when using VA-only
compared with VA/Medicare data. In contrast, using the HRRP method, 13 percent of
hospitals had differences in whether they were flagged as having excessive
readmission rates in at least one cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Inclusion of secondary payer data may cause changes in hospital
profiles, depending on the methodology used. An assessment of readmission rates
should include, to the extent possible, all available information about patients'
utilization of care.

© Health Research and Educational Trust.

PMCID: PMC4319870 [Available on 2016-02-01]
PMID: 25040588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2009 Sep;2(5):407-13. doi:
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.109.883256. Epub 2009 Jul 9.

Patterns of hospital performance in acute myocardial infarction and heart failure
30-day mortality and readmission.

Krumholz HM(1), Merrill AR, Schone EM, Schreiner GC, Chen J, Bradley EH, Wang Y, 
Wang Y, Lin Z, Straube BM, Rapp MT, Normand SL, Drye EE.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine and the Robert Wood Johnson Clinical
Scholars Program, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. harlan.krumholz@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: In 2009, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services is publicly
reporting hospital-level risk-standardized 30-day mortality and readmission rates
after acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and heart failure (HF). We provide
patterns of hospital performance, based on these measures.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We calculated the 30-day mortality and readmission rates for
all Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries ages 65 years or older with a primary 
diagnosis of AMI or HF, discharged between July 2005 and June 2008. We compared
weighted risk-standardized mortality and readmission rates across Hospital
Referral Regions and hospital structural characteristics. The median 30-day
mortality rate was 16.6% for AMI (range, 10.9% to 24.9%; 25th to 75th percentile,
15.8% to 17.4%; 10th to 90th percentile, 14.7% to 18.4%) and 11.1% for HF (range,
6.6% to 19.8%; 25th to 75th percentile, 10.3% to 12.0%; 10th to 90th percentile, 
9.4% to 13.1%). The median 30-day readmission rate was 19.9% for AMI (range,
15.3% to 29.4%; 25th to 75th percentile, 19.5% to 20.4%; 10th to 90th percentile,
18.8% to 21.1%) and 24.4% for HF (range, 15.9% to 34.4%; 25th to 75th percentile,
23.4% to 25.6%; 10th to 90th percentile, 22.3% to 27.0%). We observed geographic 
differences in performance across the country. Although there were some
differences in average performance by hospital characteristics, there were high
and low hospital performers among all types of hospitals.
CONCLUSIONS: In a recent 3-year period, 30-day risk-standardized mortality rates 
for AMI and HF varied among hospitals and across the country. The readmission
rates were particularly high.

PMID: 20031870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2011 Jan 1;4(1):60-7. doi:
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.110.954693. Epub 2010 Dec 7.

Incremental value of clinical data beyond claims data in predicting 30-day
outcomes after heart failure hospitalization.

Hammill BG(1), Curtis LH, Fonarow GC, Heidenreich PA, Yancy CW, Peterson ED,
Hernandez AF.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute and Department of Medicine, Duke University
School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27715, USA. brad.hammill@duke.edu

Comment in
    Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2011 Jan 1;4(1):11-3.

BACKGROUND: Administrative claims data are used routinely for risk adjustment and
hospital profiling for heart failure outcomes. As clinical data become more
readily available, the incremental value of adding clinical data to claims-based 
models of mortality and readmission is unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We linked heart failure hospitalizations from the Get With
The Guidelines-Heart Failure registry with Medicare claims data for patients
discharged between January 1, 2004, and December 31, 2006. We evaluated the
performance of claims-only and claims-clinical regression models for 30-day
mortality and readmission, and compared hospital rankings from both models. There
were 25 766 patients from 308 hospitals in the mortality analysis, and 24 163
patients from 307 hospitals in the readmission analysis. The claims-clinical
mortality model (area under the curve [AUC], 0.761; generalized R(2)=0.172) had
better fit than the claims-only mortality model (AUC, 0.718; R(2)=0.113). The
claims-only readmission model (AUC, 0.587; R(2)=0.025) and the claims-clinical
readmission model (AUC, 0.599; R(2)=0.031) had similar performance. Among
hospitals ranked as top or bottom performers by the claims-only mortality model, 
12% were not ranked similarly by the claims-clinical model. For the claims-only
readmission model, 3% of top or bottom performers were not ranked similarly by
the claims-clinical model.
CONCLUSIONS: Adding clinical data to claims data for heart failure
hospitalizations significantly improved prediction of mortality, and shifted
mortality performance rankings for a substantial proportion of hospitals.
Clinical data did not meaningfully improve the discrimination of the readmission 
model, and had little effect on performance rankings.

PMID: 21139093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014 May;89(5):662-76. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2014.01.004. Epub
2014 Mar 29.

Contemporary strategies in the diagnosis and management of heart failure.

Dunlay SM(1), Pereira NL(2), Kushwaha SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN; Division of Health Care Policy and Research, Department of
Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN. Electronic address:
Dunlay.Shannon@mayo.edu. (2)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of
Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

Heart failure (HF) is an important public health problem, and strategies are
needed to improve outcomes and decrease health care resource utilization and
costs. Its prevalence has increased as the population ages, and HF continues to
be associated with a high mortality rate and frequent need for hospitalization.
The total cost of care for patients with HF was $30.7 billion in 2012, and it is 
estimated to more than double to $69.8 billion by 2030. Given this reality, there
has been recent investigation into ways of identifying and preventing HF in
patients at risk (stage A HF) and those with cardiac structural and functional
abnormalities but no clinical HF symptoms (stage B). For patients who have
symptoms of HF (stage C), there has been important research into the most
effective ways to decongest patients hospitalized with acute decompensated HF and
prevent future hospital readmissions. Successful strategies to treat patients
with HF and preserved ejection fraction, which has increased in prevalence,
continue to be sought. We are in the midst of a rapid evolution in our ability to
care for patients with end-stage HF (stage D) because of the introduction of and 
improvements in mechanical circulatory support. Left ventricular assist devices
used as destination therapy offer an important therapeutic option to patients who
do not qualify for heart transplant because of advanced age or excessive
comorbidity. This review provides a thorough update on contemporary strategies in
the diagnosis and management of HF by stage (A to D) that have emerged during the
past several years.

Copyright © 2014 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24684781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Rev Clin Esp. 2011 Jul-Aug;211(7):329-37. doi: 10.1016/j.rce.2011.02.009. Epub
2011 May 6.

[EAHFE (Epidemiology Acute Heart Failure Emergency) study: analysis of the
patients with echocardiography performed prior to an emergency visit due to an
episode of acute heart failure].

[Article in Spanish]

Jacob Rodríguez J(1), Herrero Puente P, Martín Sánchez FJ, Llorens P, Miró O,
Perelló R; en representación de los miembros del grupo ICA-SEMES.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urgencias, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, L'Hospitalet del
Llobregat, Barcelona, España. jjacob@bellvitgehospital.cat

Comment in
    Rev Clin Esp. 2011 Jul-Aug;211(7):352-3.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Analyze the clinical profile and short-term
evolution of the patients attended in the Spanish Hospital Emergency Services
(SHES) due to an episode of acute heart failure (AHF) based on whether these
patients had undergone or not an echocardiography and on the ventricular function
estimated in said ultrasonography.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 9 hospitals participated. They consecutively
enrolled all the patients diagnosed of AHF during 2 months. Data were collected
on the clinical profile and the short-term evolution (intra-hospital mortality
and mortality and re-visits at 30 days). The existence of a previous
echocardiography was retrospectively investigated and, if it existed, the
quantification of the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) as well. The
ventricular function was considered to be depressed or conserved according to
whether the LVEF was greater or equal to 45% or less than 45%, respectively.
RESULTS: A total of 997 patients were enrolled. An echocardiography was available
for 547 patients (54.9%). Of these, the type of ventricular function was known in
476: 273 (57.4%) had depressed function and 203 (42.6%) had conserved function.
The patients who did not have an echocardiography were older, with fewer
pathological backgrounds. They had less advanced forms of heart disease, used
beta blockers less and, were treated less with bolus diuretics in the emergency
service. The patients with depressed systolic function were more often males,
younger, active smokers, with ischemic heart disease and had signs of left heart 
failure (orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea). Less frequently, they were 
hypertense, with valvular heart disease, with chronic atrial fibrillation and
their systolic blood pressure in the Emergency Service was lower. They were
directly discharged from the SHES more frequently. Intra-hospital mortality was
5.3%, mortality at 30 days 8.9% and re-visit at 30 days 27.2%. However, no
significant differences were found in any of these evolution variables based on
the existence or not of an echocardiography or on the type of dysfunction found
in it.
CONCLUSIONS: The patients who had an episode of AHF did not have any previous
echocardiography in a high number of cases. This fact made it necessary in these 
cases to carry out the therapeutic management in the SHES guided only by the
signs and symptoms, such as systolic blood pressure on their arrival to the
emergency service. In spite of this, the fact that the functional state of the
left ventricular was not known did not affect the intra-hospital mortality, at
30-days and readmission.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21549361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2001 Mar;3(2):209-15.

Elimination of early rehospitalization in a randomized, controlled trial of
multidisciplinary care in a high-risk, elderly heart failure population: the
potential contributions of specialist care, clinical stability and optimal
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor dose at discharge.

McDonald K(1), Ledwidge M, Cahill J, Kelly J, Quigley P, Maurer B, Begley F,
Ryder M, Travers B, Timmons L, Burke T.

Author information: 
(1)St. Vincent's University Hospital Cardiomyopathy Research Group, Elm Park,
Dublin 4, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Despite a growing body of data demonstrating the benefits of
multidisciplinary care in heart failure, persistently high rates of readmission, 
especially within the first month of discharge, continue to be documented.
AIMS: As part of an ongoing randomized study on the value of multidisciplinary
care in a high risk (NYHA Class IV), elderly (mean age 69 years) heart failure
population, we examined the effects of this intervention on previously high (20%)
1-month readmission rates.
METHODS: Unlike previous studies of this approach, both multidisciplinary (MC)
and routine care (RC) populations were cared for by the cardiology service,
complied with adherence to clinical stability criteria prior to discharge (100%
of patients) and received at least target dose angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibition with perindopril prior to discharge (94% of indicated patients).
We analysed death and unplanned readmission for heart failure at 1 month.
RESULTS: This early report from the first 70 patients (67% male, 71% systolic
dysfunction with a mean ejection fraction of 31.0+/-6.7%) enrolled in this study 
demonstrates elimination of 1-month hospital readmission in both RC and MC
groups. This unexpected result represents a dramatic improvement both for this
patient cohort (20% 30-day readmission rate prior to enrollment reduced to 0%
following the index admission in both care groups) and in comparison with
available data.
CONCLUSIONS: Critical contributors to this improvement appear to be specialist
cardiology care, adherence to clinical stability criteria prior to discharge and 
routine use of target or high-dose ACE inhibitor therapy prior to discharge.
Widespread application of this approach may have a dramatic improvement in
morbidity of CHF while limiting the escalating costs of this condition.

PMID: 11246059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Policy Polit Nurs Pract. 2010 Nov;11(4):309-16. doi: 10.1177/1527154411398490.

Medicare readmissions policies and racial and ethnic health disparities: a
cautionary tale.

McHugh MD(1), Carthon JM, Kang XL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, 418 Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA
19104-4217, USA. mchughm@nursing.upenn.edu

Beginning in 2009, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services started publicly 
reporting hospital readmission rates as part of the Hospital Compare website.
Hospitals will begin having payments reduced if their readmission rates are
higher than expected starting in fiscal year 2013. Value-based purchasing
initiatives including public reporting and pay-for-performance incentives have
the potential to increase quality of care. There is concern, however, that
hospitals providing service to minority communities may be disproportionately
penalized as a result of these policies due to higher rates of readmissions among
racial and ethnic minority groups. Using 2008 Medicare data, we assess the risk
for readmission for minorities and discuss implications for minority-serving
institutions.

PMCID: PMC3105322
PMID: 21531966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Congest Heart Fail. 2012 Sep-Oct;18 Suppl 1:S14-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-7133.2012.00304.x.

Post-acute care: the role of natriuretic peptides.

Maisel A(1), Januzzi J, Xue Y, Silver MA.

Author information: 
(1)San Diego VA Medical Hospital and University of California-San Diego, CA
92161, USA. amaisel@ucsd.edu

Heart failure is a chronic disease marked by variable acute exacerbations. Once
hospitalized the decompensated patient may have signs and symptoms only partially
reversed, medical therapy only partially optimized and deranged physiology only
partially restored. Therefore, the post-acute care period is one of unique
vulnerability and merits efforts of careful and comprehensive assessment of
patients at risk of recurrent decompensation and rehospitalization. Natriuretic
peptide (NP) assessment which has the ability to monitor dynamic changes in a
patient's physiology, may play an important role as part of a post-acute care
algorithm focused on early detection and prevention of further decompensation and
rehospitalization.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22891801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2003 Sep 1;92(5):593-5.

Outcomes of coronary artery bypass grafting in patients with a history of illicit
drug use.

Misra P(1), Caldito GC, Kakkar AK, Mancini MC, Reddy PC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130, USA. Praphul@aol.com

To date, no studies have been conducted on the effects of illicit drug use in
patients with ischemic heart disease treated with coronary artery bypass
grafting. Our retrospective study suggests that current illicit drug use is a
significant predictor of cardiovascular complications in the first 6 months after
coronary artery bypass grafting.

PMID: 12943883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Med Clin (Barc). 2012 Nov 3;139(11):479-86. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2011.05.029.
Epub 2011 Nov 16.

[Carbohydrate antigen 125 serial measurements after an admission for acute heart 
failure and risk of early readmission].

[Article in Spanish]

Miñana Escrivá G(1), Núñez J, Sanchis J, Bodi V, Núñez E, Chorro FJ, Llàcer A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario, INCLIVA, Universitat 
de València, Valencia, España. gemineta@hotmail.com

FUNDAMENT AND OBJECTIVES: The early readmission after a hospitalization for acute
heart failure (AHF) is frequent; however, factors associated are not clearly
established. Plasma levels of carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) have shown to be
associated with the presence of systemic congestion and increased risk of death
in patients with AHF. The aim of this study was to assess the relationship
between CA125 levels (during hospitalization, at the first outpatient visit or
their changes) and readmission for AHF at 6 months follow up.PATIENTS AND METHOD:
We analyzed 293 consecutive patients hospitalized for AHF in which CA125 was
determined during the index hospitalization (T1) and the first outpatient visit
after discharge (T2) (median 31 days). We examined the relationship between CA125
levels, both isolated determinations as their serial changes (absolute, relative 
or categorical) and readmission for AHF by Cox regression analysis adjusted for
competing events. The reclassification technique integrated discrimination
improvement (IDI) index was used to assess the additional discriminative power of
this biomarker over the final multivariate model.
RESULTS: At 6 months follow up, we identified 32 (10.9%) and 54 (18.4%) deaths
and readmissions for AHF, respectively. CA125 categorical changes [decrease and
normalization (C1, n=153), decrease but no normalization at T2 (C2, n=72) and
increase, with high levels at T2 (>35 U/ml) (C3, n=68)], followed by the isolated
determination of CA125 at T2, showed the best discriminative accuracy. Thus, with
respect to patients in the C1 category, patients in categories C2 and C3 showed a
higher risk of readmission for AHF: C2 vs. C1: HR=3.48, 95% CI:1.84-6.59,
p<0.001; C3 vs. C1: HR=3.18, 95% CI:1.62-6.21, p=0.001. On the other hand,
patients with elevated levels of CA125 in T2 (>35 U/ml) (41%) tripled the risk of
readmission for AHF at 6 months compared with those with normal levels of CA125
at T2: HR=3.06, 95% CI:1.79-5.23, p<0.001. The addition of the categories of
serial measurements of CA125 and the presence of elevated levels of CA125 at T2
showed a significant increase in the discriminating power of 6.27% and 6.17% in
the IDI index, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: After an episode of AHF, the elevation of CA125 levels (>35 U/ml)
after the first weeks of admission is associated with an increased risk of
readmission for AHF.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22093405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Hosp Health Netw. 2013 May;87(5):40, 49-50, 1.

A focus on heart failure.

Aston G.

Heart failure patients account for a hefty proportion of readmissions, so
hospitals are refining their discharge processes, boosting education for patients
and caregivers, and sending community health workers to their homes.

PMID: 23814952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ J. 2012;76(7):1654-61. Epub 2012 Apr 7.

Functional limitations predict the risk of rehospitalization among patients with 
chronic heart failure.

Yamada S(1), Shimizu Y, Suzuki M, Izumi T; PTMaTCH collaborators.

Collaborators: Ohkusa T, Kondo K, Matsuoka S, Satoh N, Sakamoto K, Nagao T,
Adachi H, Kumamaru M, Yoshino H, Takeda H, Nagayama M, Saitoh M, Inomata T,
Kamiya K, Ohmura N, Teduka J, Omiya K, Watanabe S, Musha H, Yokoyama Y, Katsuki
T, Sakai Y, Segawa T, Nishiwaki M, Tsuboi H, Yamashita T, Hirashiki A, Yamada S, 
Sobue T, Matsuoka T, Sakai S, Iida Y, Ohno O, Shibata K, Nohara R, Iwatsu K,
Shiraishi Y, Yamabata S, Fuku Y, Kawada M, Kawai K, Maeda H, Yokoi H, Shimada S, 
Origuchi H, Takanaga Y, Masutomo K, Ando M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.
yamadas@met.nagoya-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Although functional limitations (FLs) can predict clinical
deterioration in chronic heart failure (CHF), few studies have focused on the
associated clinical significance. The aim of the present study was to examine the
association between FL and changes in the related time course with subsequent
hospital readmission in CHF patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: FLs were analyzed using the Performance Measure for
Activities of Daily Living-8 (PMADL-8; higher scores indicate worse FLs) for 215 
CHF patients at 1 and 3 months after discharge in a multicenter cohort study. The
mean follow-up was 20 months. In a multivariate Cox regression analysis including
covariates, only the PMADL-8 score remained significantly related to
rehospitalization of CHF (hazard ratio, 2.49; 95% confidence interval: 1.27-4.90;
P<0.01). Event-free survival differed significantly among the 4 PMADL-8
time-course groups (P<0.01). The persistent low-FL group had lower event rates
than the other 3 time-course groups (P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: FLs as measured by the PMADL-8 and the time course of the PMADL-8
score predict readmission in CHF patients after discharge. Accordingly, FL
assessment is recommended as part of the clinical management because it not only 
identifies decline in physical function but also guides prognosis in CHF
patients.

PMID: 22484978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2010 Jul-Aug;25(4):284-91. doi: 10.1097/JCN.0b013e3181cfbcbb.

Symptom clusters predict event-free survival in patients with heart failure.

Song EK(1), Moser DK, Rayens MK, Lennie TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, University of Ulsan, Korea. gracesong@ulsan.ac.kr

BACKGROUND: Physical symptoms are likely to occur in clusters that may be
associated with adverse outcome in patients with heart failure (HF). Despite the 
importance of early recognition of worsening symptoms in HF management, the
impact of physical symptoms on adverse outcome has not been explored in the
context of symptom clusters.
PURPOSE: The purposes of this study were to explore which physical symptom
clusters occur in HF patients and to determine the impact of symptom clusters on 
event-free survival.
METHODS: A total of 421 patients (60% male; 62 [SD, 14] years; 72% New York Heart
Association class II/III) completed the modified Memorial Symptom Assessment
Scale-Heart Failure to measure physical symptoms during an index hospitalization 
in Seoul, Korea. Times to first event of cardiac rehospitalization and cardiac
death were collected for 12 months after discharge and confirmed by review of
hospital records. An agglomerative hierarchical clustering approach with Ward's
method was used to identify symptom clusters. Hierarchical Cox hazard regression 
was used to determine the impact of symptom clusters on cardiac rehospitalization
and cardiac mortality.
RESULTS: Two distinct symptom clusters, the dyspneic and the weary symptom
clusters, occurred in patients with HF. Shortness of breath, difficulty breathing
when lying flat, and waking up breathless at night comprised the dyspneic symptom
cluster. Lack of energy, lack of appetite, and difficulty sleeping comprised the 
weary symptom cluster. In hierarchical Cox hazard regression, elevated distress
from the weary symptom cluster independently predicted cardiac rehospitalization 
(hazard ratio, 1.45; 95% confidence interval, 1.09-1.93), and increased distress 
from the dyspneic symptom cluster independently predicted cardiac mortality
(hazard ratio, 2.00; 95% confidence interval, 1.16-3.34).
CONCLUSION: The weary and the dyspneic symptom clusters predicted cardiac
rehospitalization and cardiac mortality, respectively. Patient education for
self-monitoring of symptoms should focus on symptom clusters rather than single
symptom.

PMCID: PMC2888008
PMID: 20539163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2012 May;13(5):299-306. doi:
10.2459/JCM.0b013e328351677f.

Edema index established by a segmental multifrequency bioelectrical impedance
analysis provides prognostic value in acute heart failure.

Liu MH(1), Wang CH, Huang YY, Tung TH, Lee CM, Yang NI, Liu PC, Cherng WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Heart Failure Center,
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Keelung, Keelung, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: A segmental multifrequency bioelectrical impedance analysis (SMBIA)
is a noninvasive and reproducible modality for estimating the fluid state. The
aim of this study was to test whether the SMBIA-derived edema index provides
prognostic value in patients hospitalized due to acute heart failure (AHF).
METHODS: To estimate the 6-month prognostic value of the predischarge edema index
in patients hospitalized due to AHF, 112 patients were consecutively enrolled.
Both predischarge edema index and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) were measured.
Outcome follow-up focused on heart failure-related and all-cause
re-hospitalizations and all events.
RESULTS: On the basis of a cutoff value of edema index of 0.390, patients were
separated into two groups: edema index more than 0.390 (n = 44) and edema index
of 0.390 or less (n = 68). Compared with patients with edema index 0.390 or less,
those with edema index of more than 0.390 were older, had lower blood albumin and
hemoglobin levels, and had higher predischarge BNP levels, functional class,
incidence of diabetes mellitus, valvular cause, and diuretic use. Although edema 
indexes were correlated with BNP levels (r = 0.47, P < 0.0001), a mismatch was
noted in 33 (29%) patients. Univariate and multivariate analysis showed that an
edema index of more than 0.390 predicted a higher incidence of heart
failure-related re-hospitalization [odds ratio (OR) = 4.14, confidence interval
(CI) = 1.05-15.28, P = 0.04] and all events (OR = 3.97, CI = 1.4-11.25,
P = 0.01). The edema index provided a prognostic value superior to that of BNP.
Reducing the edema index in high-risk patients resulted in fewer heart
failure-related re-hospitalizations (OR = 0.81, CI = 0.77-0.84, P < 0.001) and
all events (OR = 0.8, CI = 0.76-0.85, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Edema index provides 6-month prognostic values in patients
hospitalized due to AHF. Reducing the edema index in high-risk patients results
in better outcomes.

PMID: 22367574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ J. 2009 Oct;73(10):1901-8. Epub 2009 Aug 4.

Anemia is an independent predictor of long-term adverse outcomes in patients
hospitalized with heart failure in Japan. A report from the Japanese Cardiac
Registry of Heart Failure in Cardiology (JCARE-CARD).

Hamaguchi S(1), Tsuchihashi-Makaya M, Kinugawa S, Yokota T, Takeshita A,
Yokoshiki H, Tsutsui H; JCARE-CARD Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Anemia is common in patients with heart failure (HF) and is
associated with worse outcomes. However, the effects of anemia are unknown in an 
unselected group of HF patients encountered in routine clinical practice in
Japan. The impact of anemia on long-term outcomes including mortality and
rehospitalization among patients hospitalized with HF was thus assessed.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The Japanese Cardiac Registry of Heart Failure in Cardiology
(JCARE-CARD) prospectively studied the characteristics and treatments in a broad 
sample of patients hospitalized with worsening HF and the outcomes were followed.
Study cohorts (n=1,960) were classified into 4 groups by discharge hemoglobin
quartiles: <10.1 g/dl (n=482), 10.1-11.9 g/dl (n=479), 12.0-13.6 g/dl (n=487),
and >or=13.7 g/dl (n=512). Of the total cohort of HF patients, 57% had anemia,
defined by using the World Health Organization definition. Patients with lower
hemoglobin quartiles had higher rates of all-cause death, cardiac death, and
rehospitalization due to worsening HF. After multivariable adjustment, the risk
for all-cause death, cardiac death, and rehospitalization significantly increased
with low hemoglobin concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: Anemia was quite common especially in patients with HF encountered
in routine clinical practice in Japan, and lower hemoglobin was independently
associated with long-term adverse outcomes in these patients.

PMID: 19652398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Lung. 2009 Sep-Oct;38(5):427-34. doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2008.12.002. Epub
2009 Jan 21.

Reasons for readmission in heart failure: Perspectives of patients, caregivers,
cardiologists, and heart failure nurses.

Annema C(1), Luttik ML, Jaarsma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Heart Lung. 2010 Jan-Feb;39(1):1.

OBJECTIVE: Despite efforts to improve outcomes in heart failure (HF), readmission
rates remain relatively high. Reasons for readmission from different perspectives
(patient, caregiver, health care providers) may help to optimize the future
management of patients with HF. The aims of this study are to 1) gain insight
into reasons for HF readmission from the perspective of patients, caregivers,
cardiologists, and HF nurses; 2) examine similarities and differences in
perspectives on the reason for an HF readmission, and 3) describe possibilities
to prevent an HF readmission from different perspectives.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Data on reasons for readmission were collected on 173
readmissions. Perspectives of patients, caregivers, cardiologists, and HF nurses 
were collected by interview and questionnaire. Worsening HF as the sole reason
for readmission was reported most often; however, 36% of caregivers, 56% of
patients, and 63% to 65% of health care providers indicated that other factors,
such as comorbidity, nonadherence, and nonoptimal medication, were important
contributing factors. In only 34% of readmissions, patients and their caregivers 
agreed with health care providers on the underlying reason. Respondents reported 
that 23% to 31% of the readmissions could probably have been prevented if
adherence were higher, patients requested help earlier, and adequate
multidisciplinary professional help were available.
CONCLUSION: To prevent future readmissions of patients with HF, it is important
to fully understand the reasons for readmission by gaining insight on the reason 
for readmission from different perspectives. Also, we may need another approach
to prevent adverse outcomes in which other medical problems and new strategies to
improve adherence have to be considered.

PMID: 19755193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Cardiol. 2013 Dec;36(12):757-65. doi: 10.1002/clc.22206. Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Postdischarge international normalized ratio testing and long-term clinical
outcomes of patients with heart failure receiving warfarin: findings from the
ADHERE registry linked to Medicare claims.

Qualls LG(1), Greiner MA, Eapen ZJ, Fonarow GC, Mills RM, Klaskala W, Hernandez
AF, Curtis LH.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, 
North Carolina.

BACKGROUND: Effective warfarin thromboprophylaxis requires maintaining
anticoagulation within the recommended international normalized ratio (INR)
range. INR testing rates and associations between testing and outcomes are not
well understood.
HYPOTHESIS: INR testing rates after hospitalization for acute decompensated heart
failure are suboptimal, and testing is associated with lower risks of mortality
and adverse clinical events.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study of patients who were long-term
warfarin users and were hospitalized for heart failure, had a medical history of 
atrial fibrillation or valvular heart disease, and were enrolled in
fee-for-service Medicare. INR testing was defined as ≥1 outpatient INR test
within 45 days after discharge. Using Cox proportional hazards models, we
examined associations between testing and all-cause mortality, all-cause
readmission, and adverse clinical events at 1 year.
RESULTS: Among 8558 patients, 7722 (90.2%) were tested. After 1 year, tested
patients had lower all-cause mortality (23.5% vs 32.6%; P < 0.001) and fewer
myocardial infarctions (2.0% vs 3.3%; P = 0.02). These differences remained
significant after multivariable adjustment with hazard ratios of 0.72 (95%
confidence interval [CI]: 0.63-0.84; P < 0.001) and 0.58 (95% CI: 0.41-0.83;
P = 0.003), respectively. Differences in all-cause readmission, thromboembolic
events, ischemic stroke, and bleeding events were not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Postdischarge outpatient INR testing in patients with heart failure 
complicated by atrial fibrillation or valvular heart disease was high. INR
testing was associated with improved survival and fewer myocardial infarctions at
1 year but was not independently associated with other adverse clinical events.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24114926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2008 Mar;10(3):222-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ejheart.2008.02.014.

Heart failure in the elderly: how risky is it to be discharged?

Nieminen MS, Harjola VP.

Comment on
    Eur J Heart Fail. 2008 Mar;10(3):308-14.

PMID: 18331965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2014 Jan;107(1):10-20. doi: 10.1016/j.acvd.2013.10.005. Epub
2013 Dec 18.

Predictors of 6-month poor clinical outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve
implantation.

Auffret V(1), Boulmier D(2), Oger E(3), Bedossa M(2), Donal E(2), Laurent M(2),
Sost G(4), Beneux X(5), Harmouche M(5), Verhoye JP(5), Le Breton H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1099, Rennes, France; Université de Rennes 1, LTSI, Rennes, France;
CHU de Rennes, Service de Cardiologie et Maladies Vasculaires, Rennes, France;
Inserm, CIC-IT804, Rennes, France. Electronic address:
vincent.auffret@chu-rennes.fr. (2)Inserm, U1099, Rennes, France; Université de
Rennes 1, LTSI, Rennes, France; CHU de Rennes, Service de Cardiologie et Maladies
Vasculaires, Rennes, France; Inserm, CIC-IT804, Rennes, France. (3)CHU de Rennes,
Service de Pharmacologie Clinique, Rennes, France. (4)CHU de Rennes, Service de
Gériatrie, Rennes, France. (5)CHU de Rennes, Service de Chirurgie Cardiaque,
Thoracique et Vasculaire, Rennes, France.

BACKGROUND: Patient selection for transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) 
remains a major concern. Indeed, despite promising results, it is still unclear
which patients are most and least likely to benefit from this procedure.
AIMS: To identify predictors of 6-month poor clinical outcomes after TAVI.
METHODS: Patients who were discharged from our institution with a
transcatheter-implanted aortic valve were followed prospectively. Our population 
was divided into two groups ('good outcomes' and 'poor outcomes') according to
occurrence of primary endpoint (composite of all-cause mortality, all stroke,
hospitalizations for valve-related symptoms or worsening heart failure from
discharge to 6 months or 6-month New York Heart Association functional class III 
or IV). Patient characteristics were studied to find predictors of poor outcomes.
RESULTS: We included 163 patients (mean age, 79.9 ± 8.8 years; 90 men [55%]; mean
logistic EuroSCORE, 18.4 ± 11.4%). The primary endpoint occurred in 49 patients
(mean age, 83 ± 5 years; 31 men [63%]). By multivariable analysis, atrial
fibrillation (odds ratio [OR] 3.94), systolic pulmonary artery pressure ≥60 mmHg 
(OR 7.56) and right ventricular dysfunction (OR 3.55) were independent predictors
of poor outcomes, whereas baseline aortic regurgitation ≥2/4 (OR 0.07)
demonstrated a protective effect.
CONCLUSION: Atrial fibrillation, severe baseline pulmonary hypertension and right
ventricular dysfunction (i.e. variables suggesting a more evolved aortic
stenosis) were predictors of 6-month poor outcomes. Conversely, baseline aortic
regurgitation ≥2/4 showed a protective effect, which needs to be confirmed in
future studies. Our study highlights the need for a specific 'TAVI risk score',
which could lead to better patient selection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24361056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Med Care. 2010 Nov;48(11):981-8. doi: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e3181ef60d9.

An automated model to identify heart failure patients at risk for 30-day
readmission or death using electronic medical record data.

Amarasingham R(1), Moore BJ, Tabak YP, Drazner MH, Clark CA, Zhang S, Reed WG,
Swanson TS, Ma Y, Halm EA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Innovation, Parkland Health and Hospital System, Dallas,
TX 75235, USA. ramara@parknet.pmh.org

BACKGROUND: A real-time electronic predictive model that identifies hospitalized 
heart failure (HF) patients at high risk for readmission or death may be valuable
to clinicians and hospitals who care for these patients.
METHODS: An automated predictive model for 30-day readmission and death was
derived and validated from clinical and nonclinical risk factors present on
admission in 1372 HF hospitalizations to a major urban hospital between January
2007 and August 2008. Data were extracted from an electronic medical record. The 
performance of the electronic model was compared with mortality and readmission
models developed by the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS models)
and a HF mortality model derived from the Acute Decompensated Heart Failure
Registry (ADHERE model).
RESULTS: The 30-day mortality and readmission rates were 3.1% and 24.1%
respectively. The electronic model demonstrated good discrimination for 30 day
mortality (C statistic 0.86) and readmission (C statistic 0.72) and performed as 
well, or better than, the ADHERE model and CMS models for both outcomes (C
statistic ranges: 0.72-0.73 and 0.56-0.66 for mortality and readmissions
respectively; P < 0.05 in all comparisons). Markers of social instability and
lower socioeconomic status improved readmission prediction in the electronic
model (C statistic 0.72 vs. 0.61, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical and social factors available within hours of hospital
presentation and extractable from an EMR predicted mortality and readmission at
30 days. Incorporating complex social factors increased the model's accuracy,
suggesting that such factors could enhance risk adjustment models designed to
compare hospital readmission rates.

PMID: 20940649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Europace. 2013 Dec;15(12):1747-56. doi: 10.1093/europace/eut130. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Revisiting diastolic filling time as mechanistic insight for response to cardiac 
resynchronization therapy.

Verbrugge FH(1), Verhaert D, Grieten L, Dupont M, Rivero-Ayerza M, De Vusser P,
Van Herendael H, Reyskens R, Vandervoort P, Tang WH, Mullens W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Ziekenhuis Oost-Limburg, Schiepse Bos 6, 3600 Genk, 
Belgium.

AIMS: Intraventricular dyssynchrony and commonly associated prolonged
atrioventricular conduction both reduce diastolic filling time (DFT), which can
be improved by cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT). Our aim was to
investigate whether change in DFT corrected for RR interval (DFTC) after CRT
might serve to assess the mechanistic response to CRT.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Echocardiography data of consecutive patients in sinus
rhythm (n = 91) were studied before and 6 months after implantation. Mortality
and heart failure hospitalization data were collected. Patients with vs. without 
DFTC increase after 6 months were compared. The programmed atrioventricular
delay, percentage of biventricular pacing, and change in PR interval were similar
in both groups. DFTC increase after 6 months reflected favourable reverse left
ventricular remodelling and was significantly associated with freedom from death 
or heart failure admission (P = 0.008). In multivariate analysis including
guideline criteria for CRT (i.e. QRS width, presence of left bundle branch block,
and ejection fraction), interventricular mechanical delay, and Tei index,
baseline DFTC was the strongest predictor of adverse outcome. Notably, while
patients with impaired relaxation had a large and highly significant reduction in
all-cause mortality and heart failure admissions when DFTC increased [hazard
ratio (HR), 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.24, 0.08-0.73; P = 0.012], this
benefit was less pronounced and did not reach statistical significance in
patients with pseudonormal or restrictive filling (HR, 95% CI = 0.64, 0.23-1.77; 
P = 0.388).
CONCLUSION: DFTC increase after CRT reflects favourable reverse remodelling and
is associated with better clinical outcome.

PMID: 23821473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004 Oct 6;44(7):1446-53.

Outcomes in heart failure patients after major noncardiac surgery.

Hernandez AF(1), Whellan DJ, Stroud S, Sun JL, O'Connor CM, Jollis JG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. herna014@mc.duke.edu <herna014@mc.duke.edu>

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to evaluate mortality and readmission
rates of heart failure (HF) patients after major noncardiac surgery.
BACKGROUND: There is a lack of generalizable outcome data on HF patients
undergoing major noncardiac surgery because previous studies have been limited to
a few academic centers or have not focused on this group of patients.
METHODS: Using the 1997 to 1998 Standard Analytic File 5% Sample of Medicare
beneficiaries, we identified patients with HF who underwent major noncardiac
surgery. A multivariable logistic regression model was used to provide adjusted
mortality and readmission rates in patients after noncardiac surgery. Patients
with coronary artery disease (CAD) and all other remaining patients (Control) who
had similar surgery served as reference groups.
RESULTS: Of 23,340 HF patients and 28,710 CAD patients, 1,532 (6.56%) HF patients
and 1,757 (6.12%) CAD patients underwent major noncardiac surgery. There were
44,512 patients in the Control group with major noncardiac surgery. After
accounting for demographic characteristics, type of surgery, and comorbid
conditions, the risk-adjusted operative mortality (death before discharge or
within 30 days of surgery) was HF 11.7%, CAD 6.6%, and Control 6.2% (HF vs. CAD, 
p < 0.001; CAD vs. Control, p = 0.518). The risk-adjusted 30-day readmission rate
was HF 20.0%, CAD 14.2%, and Control 11.0% (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients 65 years of age and older, HF patients undergoing major 
noncardiac surgery suffer substantial morbidity and mortality despite advances in
perioperative care, whereas patients with CAD without HF have similar mortality
compared with a more general population.

PMID: 15464326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Prof Case Manag. 2012 Jul-Aug;17(4):155-61; quiz 162-3. doi:
10.1097/NCM.0b013e31824c5fca.

Heart failure rehospitalization of the Medicare FFS patient: a state-level
analysis exploring 30-day readmission factors.

Schmeida M(1), Savrin RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Political Science, Kent State University, Kent, OH 44224, USA.
mschmeid@kent.edu

PURPOSE OF STUDY: Heart failure readmission among the elderly is frequent and
costly to both the patient and the Medicare trust fund. In this study, the
authors explore the factors that are associated with states having heart failure 
readmission rates that are higher than the U.S. national rate.
PRIMARY PRACTICE SETTING(S): Acute inpatient hospital settings.
METHODOLOGY AND SAMPLE: 50 state-level data and multivariate regression analysis 
is used. The dependent variable Heart Failure 30-day Readmission Worse than U.S. 
Rate is based on adult Medicare Fee-for-Service patients hospitalized with a
primary discharge diagnosis of heart failure and for which a subsequent inpatient
readmission occurred within 30 days of their last discharge.
RESULTS: One key variable found--states with a higher resident population
speaking a primary language other than English at home--that is significantly
associated with a decrease in probability in states ranking "worse" on heart
failure 30-day readmission. Whereas, states with a higher median income, more
total days of care per 1,000 Medicare enrollees, and a greater percentage of
Medicare enrollees with prescription drug coverage have a greater probability for
heart failure 30-day readmission to be "worse" than the U.S. national rate.
IMPLICATIONS FOR CASE MANAGEMENT PRACTICE: Case management interventions
targeting health literacy may be more effective than other factors to improve
state-level hospital status on heart failure 30-day readmission. Factors such as 
total days of care per 1,000 Medicare enrollees and improving patient access to
postdischarge medication(s) may not be as important as literacy. Interventions
aimed to prevent disparities should consider higher income population groups as
vulnerable for readmission.

PMID: 22660336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2009 Apr;11(4):400-5. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfp002. Epub 2009 Jan
29.

Patient-rated changes in fatigue over a 12-month period predict poor outcome in
chronic heart failure.

Smith OR(1), Denollet J, Schiffer AA, Kupper N, Gidron Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Psychology, Tilburg University, 5000 LE Tilburg, The
Netherlands.

AIMS: Little is known about the factors that are associated with changes in
fatigue in chronic heart failure (CHF). Moreover, it is unclear whether these
changes have prognostic impact. The aim of this study was to examine these
issues.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Three hundred and eighty-seven CHF patients were assessed
twice (at baseline and at 12-month follow-up) for exertion and general fatigue.
Regression models were developed to assess whether baseline characteristics
predicted changes in fatigue and to assess the effect of changes in fatigue on
cardiac events occurring beyond 12-months of follow-up. An increase in exertion
fatigue over a 12-month period was predicted by higher left ventricular ejection 
fraction (P = 0.02) and cognitive-affective depressive symptoms (P = 0.03) at
baseline, and not having a biventricular pacemaker shortly after baseline (P =
0.02), whereas an increase in general fatigue was only predicted by
cognitive-affective depressive symptoms (P = 0.002). One hundred and forty-three 
patients (37%) experienced an event (readmitted, 117; death, 26). An increase in 
exertion fatigue was associated with a near two-fold increased risk of events
beyond 12-months of follow-up (hazard ratio = 1.78; 95% confidence interval
1.18-2.68, P = 0.006), while controlling for standard cardiac risk factors.
CONCLUSION: Baseline clinical and psychosocial factors predicted changes in
fatigue. Increased exertion fatigue independently predicted an increased risk of 
cardiac re-admission or death.

PMID: 19179405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Psychosomatics. 2014 Jan-Feb;55(1):45-50. doi: 10.1016/j.psym.2013.06.019. Epub
2013 Sep 7.

Behavioral factors and hospital admissions/readmissions in patients with CHF.

Ketterer MW(1), Draus C(2), McCord J(2), Mossallam U(2), Hudson M(2).

Author information: 
(1)HFH Hospital Administration, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI; Division of
Cardiology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI. Electronic address:
markwketterer@cs.com. (2)HFH Hospital Administration, Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit, MI; Division of Cardiology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI.

BACKGROUND: Wasted health care resources have become a central concern in
American health care. Heart failure has one of the highest readmission rates
amongst all conditions studied in Medicare/Medicaid populations.
OBJECTIVE: The present study was an attempt to cross-sectionally identify
correlates of number of past-year admissions and 30-day readmissions in patients 
with congestive heart failure.
METHODS: Eighty-four patients with congestive heart failure were recruited during
hospitalization and underwent a semistructured interview for basic
clinical/demographic information and completed several questionnaires measuring
depression, anxiety, and spirituality.
RESULTS: Depression, history of substance abuse, and history of coronary artery
disease displayed borderline results as correlates of past-year admissions.
Immediate memory and psychiatric history (positive Patient Health Questionnaire
9, acknowledged history of treatment, and use of an antidepressant per chart)
were associated with 30-day readmission rates. Indices of congestive heart
failure severity (ejection fraction and last recorded B-type natriuretic peptide 
level) were not.
CONCLUSIONS: Present results suggest that both a psychiatric history and
cognitive impairment are possible determinants of early readmission.

Copyright © 2014 The Academy of Psychosomatic Medicine. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24016384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Clin Epidemiol. 2000 Nov;53(11):1113-8.

Predicting non-elective hospital readmissions: a multi-site study. Department of 
Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group on Primary Care and Readmissions.

Smith DM(1), Giobbie-Hurder A, Weinberger M, Oddone EZ, Henderson WG, Asch DA,
Ashton CM, Feussner JR, Ginier P, Huey JM, Hynes DM, Loo L, Mengel CE.

Author information: 
(1)Richard L. Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center (11H), 1481 W. Tenth St.,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. david@hsrd.va.iupui.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine clinical and patient-centered factors predicting
non-elective hospital readmissions.
DESIGN: Secondary analysis from a randomized clinical trial.
CLINICAL SETTING: Nine VA medical centers.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients discharged from the medical service with diabetes
mellitus, congestive heart failure, and/or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENT: Non-elective readmission within 90 days.
RESULTS: Of 1378 patients discharged, 23.3% were readmitted. After controlling
for hospital and intervention status, risk of readmission was increased if the
patient had more hospitalizations and emergency room visits in the prior 6
months, higher blood urea nitrogen, lower mental health function, a diagnosis of 
COPD, and increased satisfaction with access to emergency care assessed on the
index hospitalization.
CONCLUSIONS: Both clinical and patient-centered factors identifiable at discharge
are related to non-elective readmission. These factors identify high-risk
patients and provide guidance for future interventions. The relationship of
patient satisfaction measures to readmission deserves further study.

PMID: 11106884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart. 2014 Jan;100(2):115-25. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2013-303632. Epub 2013 Oct
31.

A novel discharge risk model for patients hospitalised for acute decompensated
heart failure incorporating N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide levels: a
European coLlaboration on Acute decompeNsated Heart Failure: ELAN-HF Score.

Salah K(1), Kok WE, Eurlings LW, Bettencourt P, Pimenta JM, Metra M, Bayes-Genis 
A, Verdiani V, Bettari L, Lazzarini V, Damman P, Tijssen JG, Pinto YM.

Author information: 
(1)Heart failure Research Center & Department of Cardiology, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, , Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Models to stratify risk for patients hospitalised for acute
decompensated heart failure (ADHF) do not include the change in N-terminal
pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) levels during hospitalisation.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to develop a simple yet robust discharge
prognostication score including NT-proBNP for this notorious high-risk
population.
DESIGN: Individual patient data meta-analyses of prospective cohort studies.
SETTING: Seven prospective cohorts with in total 1301 patients.
PATIENTS: Our study population was assembled from the seven studies by selecting 
those patients admitted because of clinically validated ADHF, discharged alive,
and NT-proBNP measurements available at admission and at discharge.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The endpoints studied were all-cause mortality and a
composite of all-cause mortality and/or first readmission for cardiovascular
reason within 180 days after discharge.
RESULTS: The model that incorporated NT-proBNP levels at discharge as well as the
changes in NT-proBNP during hospitalisation in addition to age ≥75 years,
peripheral oedema, systolic blood pressure ≤115 mm Hg, hyponatremia at admission,
serum urea of ≥15 mmol/L and New York Heart Association (NYHA) class at
discharge, yielded the best C-statistic (area under the curve, 0.78, 95% CI 0.74 
to 0.82). The addition of NT-proBNP to a reference model significantly improved
prediction of mortality as shown by the net reclassification improvement (62%,
p<0.001). A simplified model was obtained from the final Cox regression model by 
assigning weights to individual risk markers proportional to their relative
risks. The risk score we designed identified four clinically significant
subgroups. The pattern of increasing event rates with increasing score was
confirmed in the validation group (BOT-AcuteHF, n=325, p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients hospitalised for ADHF, the addition of the discharge
NT-proBNP values as well as the change in NT-proBNP to known risk markers,
generates a relatively simple yet robust discharge risk score that importantly
improves the prediction of adverse events.

PMID: 24179162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Oct;148(4):1606-14. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2014.04.009. Epub 2014 Apr 12.

Long-term outcome of patients on continuous-flow left ventricular assist device
support.

Takeda K(1), Takayama H(1), Kalesan B(2), Uriel N(3), Colombo PC(3), Jorde UP(3),
Naka Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY. (2)Division of Surgery and Epidemiology, Department
of Surgery, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY. (3)Division of
Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,
NY. (4)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY. Electronic address:
yn33@cumc.columbia.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Recent advances in technology and improved patient management have
enabled the use of mechanical circulatory support for unexpected long-term
periods. Improved long-term outcomes may facilitate the use of device therapy as 
an alternative to heart transplantation. However, there are scarce data about the
long-term outcomes of continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices. This study
sought to evaluate the long-term outcomes in patients receiving continuous-flow
left ventricular assist devices.
METHODS: Between March 2004 and June 2010, 140 patients underwent continuous-flow
left ventricular assist device insertion as a bridge to transplantation or a
destination therapy. These patients' charts were retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: The initial strategy for continuous-flow left ventricular assist device 
therapy was bridge to transplantation in 115 patients (82%) and destination
therapy in 25 patients (18%). Of those, 24 (17%) died on left ventricular assist 
device support, 94 (67%) were successfully bridged to transplantation, and 1
(0.71%) showed native heart recovery. Twenty-four patients (17%) had been on
continuous-flow left ventricular assist device support for more than 3 years
(mean, 3.9 years; range, 3.0-7.5 years). Estimated on-device survival at 1, 3,
and 5 years was 83%, 75%, and 61%, respectively. Rehospitalizations due to
bleeding, cardiac events, and device-related issues were common. The freedom from
rehospitalization rates at 1 and 3 years was 31% and 6.9%, respectively. A total 
of 14 patients (10%) required device exchange.
CONCLUSIONS: Current continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices can provide 
satisfactory long-term survival. However, rehospitalization is frequently
required.

Copyright © 2014 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25260275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Feb 16;55(7):645-53. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.08.078.

N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide-guided, intensive patient management in
addition to multidisciplinary care in chronic heart failure a 3-arm, prospective,
randomized pilot study.

Berger R(1), Moertl D, Peter S, Ahmadi R, Huelsmann M, Yamuti S, Wagner B, Pacher
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
rudolf.berger@meduniwien.ac.at <rudolf.berger@meduniwien.ac.at>

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2010 Jul 20;153(2):JC1-8.

OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to investigate whether the addition of
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide-guided, intensive patient management
(BM) to multidisciplinary care (MC) improves outcome in patients following
hospitalization due to heart failure (HF).
BACKGROUND: Patients hospitalized due to HF experience frequent
rehospitalizations and high mortality.
METHODS: Patients hospitalized due to HF were randomized to BM, MC, or usual care
(UC). Multidisciplinary care included 2 consultations from an HF specialist who
provided therapeutic recommendations and home care by a specialized HF nurse. In 
addition, BM included intensified up-titration of medication by HF specialists in
high-risk patients. NT-proBNP was used to define the level of risk and to monitor
wall stress. This monitoring allowed for anticipation of cardiac decompensation
and adjustment of medication in advance.
RESULTS: A total of 278 patients were randomized in 8 Viennese hospitals. After
12 months, the BM group had the highest proportion of antineurohormonal
triple-therapy (difference among all groups). Accordingly, BM reduced days of HF 
hospitalization (488 days) compared with the hospitalization for the MC (1,254
days) and UC (1,588 days) groups (p < 0.0001; significant differences among all
groups). Using Kaplan-Meier analysis, the first HF rehospitalization (28%) was
lower in the BM versus MC groups (40%; p = 0.06) and the MC versus UC groups
(61%; p = 0.01). Moreover, the combined end point of death or HF
rehospitalization was lower in the BM (37%) than in the MC group (50%; p < 0.05) 
and in the MC than in the UC group (65%; p = 0.04). Death rate was similar
between the BM (22%) and MC groups (22%), but was lower compared with the UC
group (39%; vs. BM: p < 0.02; vs. MC: p < 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with MC alone, additional BM improves clinical outcome in
patients after HF hospitalization. (BNP Guided Care in Addition to
Multidisciplinary Care; NCT00355017).

PMID: 20170790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Gen Intern Med. 2013 Feb;28(2):269-82. doi: 10.1007/s11606-012-2235-x. Epub
2012 Oct 6.

Impact of social factors on risk of readmission or mortality in pneumonia and
heart failure: systematic review.

Calvillo-King L(1), Arnold D, Eubank KJ, Lo M, Yunyongying P, Stieglitz H, Halm
EA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-8889, USA.
linda.calvillo-king@utsouthwestern.edu

BACKGROUND: Readmission and mortality after hospitalization for
community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) and heart failure (HF) are publically
reported. This systematic review assessed the impact of social factors on risk of
readmission or mortality after hospitalization for CAP and HF-variables outside a
hospital's control.
METHODS: We searched OVID, PubMed and PSYCHINFO for studies from 1980 to 2012.
Eligible articles examined the association between social factors and readmission
or mortality in patients hospitalized with CAP or HF. We abstracted data on study
characteristics, domains of social factors examined, and presence and magnitude
of associations.
RESULTS: Seventy-two articles met inclusion criteria (20 CAP, 52 HF). Most CAP
studies evaluated age, gender, and race and found older age and non-White race
were associated with worse outcomes. The results for gender were mixed. Few
studies assessed higher level social factors, but those examined were often, but 
inconsistently, significantly associated with readmissions after CAP, including
lower education, low income, and unemployment, and with mortality after CAP,
including low income. For HF, older age was associated with worse outcomes and
results for gender were mixed. Non-Whites had more readmissions after HF but
decreased mortality. Again, higher level social factors were less frequently
studied, but those examined were often, but inconsistently, significantly
associated with readmissions, including low socioeconomic status (Medicaid
insurance, low income), living situation (home stability rural address), lack of 
social support, being unmarried and risk behaviors (smoking, cocaine use and
medical/visit non-adherence). Similar findings were observed for factors
associated with mortality after HF, along with psychiatric comorbidities, lack of
home resources and greater distance to hospital.
CONCLUSIONS: A broad range of social factors affect the risk of post-discharge
readmission and mortality in CAP and HF. Future research on adverse events after 
discharge should study social determinants of health.

PMCID: PMC3614153
PMID: 23054925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Nurs Care Qual. 2006 Apr-Jun;21(2):160-7.

Evidenced-based factors in readmission of patients with heart failure.

Anderson MA(1), Levsen J, Dusio ME, Bryant PJ, Brown SM, Burr CM, Brown-Benn C.

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, University of Illinois at Chicago, 1515 Fifth Avenue,
Suite 500, Moline, IL 61265, USA. MAA928@uic.edu

The purpose of this project was to organize the variables associated with the
hospital readmission of patients with heart failure (HF) into a usable framework 
to inform clinical practice and facilitate administrative decision making. An
integrated, systematic review of the literature was used as the research
approach. A content analysis of the sample (31 research reports from the years
1986-2004) yielded multiple factors associated with the hospital readmission of
HF patients. Factors and their definitions were extracted, grouped into like
categories, and eventually classified into 5 domains-demographic, physiologic,
psychosocial, patient functioning, and resource utilization. The resulting
framework has clinical, research, and administrative implications in the delivery
of care to HF patients.

PMID: 16540785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Intern Med. 2012 Dec;23(8):760-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2012.06.006. Epub
2012 Jul 2.

Inclusion into a heart failure critical pathway reduces the risk of death or
readmission after hospital discharge.

Garin N(1), Carballo S, Gerstel E, Lerch R, Meyer P, Zare M, Zawodnik A, Perrier 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Geneva University Hospitals, Switzerland.
Nicolas.Garin@hcuge.ch

BACKGROUND: Evidence-based therapies can lower the risk of death or hospital
admission in heart failure (HF) patients, but are underprescribed. Critical
pathways are one means of supporting systematic use of evidence-based
recommendations.
METHODS: Patients admitted for HF in one hospital in 2009 and included in a
critical pathway were compared with a control group of patients admitted in 2007.
The primary endpoint was the risk of death or readmission within 90 days after
discharge. The hazard ratio of death or readmission was evaluated in a
multivariate Cox proportional hazard model adjusting for age, sex,
co-morbidities, and length of stay.
RESULTS: Three hundred and sixty-three patients were evaluated (151 in the
critical pathway and 212 in the control group). Adjusted hazard ratio for death
or readmission at 90 days was 0.72 (95 CI 0.51-1.00, p=0.049). Adhesion to
guidelines was significantly better for patients included in the critical pathway
(p=0.004), with more frequent prescription of beta-blockers (70.9% (95% CI
62.9-78.0) vs. 56.6% (95% CI 49.6-63.4), p=0.006), and evaluation of left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF, 73.5% (95% CI 65.7-80.3) vs. 57.5% (95% CI
50.6-64.3), p=0.002). Patients with reduced LVEF seem to have benefited the most 
from the inclusion in the critical pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Implementation of a critical pathway for patients hospitalized for
HF was associated with a 28% reduction of the relative risk of death or
readmission and improved adhesion to guidelines.

Copyright © 2012 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23122393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. 2008 Sep;12(5):644-9. doi:
10.1109/TITB.2007.911311.

Emergency readmission criterion: a technique for determining the emergency
readmission time window.

Demir E(1), Chaussalet TJ, Xie H, Millard PH.

Author information: 
(1)Health and Social Care Modelling Group, Department of Information Systems and 
Computing, School of Informatics, University of Westminster, London W1W 6UW, UK. 
demirer@wmin.ac.uk

A frequently chosen time window in defining readmission is 28 days after
discharge. Yet in the literature, shorter and longer periods such as 14 days or
90-180 days have also been suggested. In this paper, we develop a modeling
approach that systematically tackles the issue surrounding the appropriate choice
of a time window as a definition of readmission. The approach is based on the
intuitive idea that patients who are discharged from hospital can be broadly
divided in to two groups-a group that is at high risk of readmission and a group 
that is at low risk. Using the national data (England), we demonstrate the
usefulness of the approach in the case of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), stroke, and congestive heart failure (CHF) patients, which are known to
be the leading causes of early readmission. Our findings suggest that there are
marked differences in the optimal width of the time window for COPD, stroke, and 
CHF patients. Furthermore, time windows and the probabilities of being in the
high-risk group for COPD, stroke, and CHF patients for each of the 29 acute and
specialist trusts in the London area indicate wide variability between hospitals.
The novelty of this modeling approach lies in its ability to define an
appropriate time window based on evidence objectively derived from operational
data. Therefore, it can separately provide a unique approach in examining
variability between hospitals, and potentially contribute to a better definition 
of readmission as a performance indicator.

PMID: 18779079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Crit Care Nurs Q. 2007 Apr-Jun;30(2):94-103.

Management of acute decompensated heart failure.

Varughese S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular and Transplant Nursing, St Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA. svarughese1@sleh.com

Heart failure, a debilitating complex clinical syndrome, affects nearly 5 million
people in the United States and presents a heavy socioeconomic burden.
Neurohormonal abnormalities contribute to the pathophysiology of heart failure.
Acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF) has emerged as a major health problem
associated with poor prognosis, increased costs related to care, reduced quality 
of life, and frequent readmissions. Symptoms of ADHF are primarily related to
congestion and/or low perfusion states. The use of biomakers such as
B-natriuretic peptides is useful in distinguishing between cardiac and noncardiac
causes of symptoms. Treatment for ADHF begins with identification and treatment
of precipitating factors for acute decompensation. Initial goal of therapy is
focused on symptom management followed by interventions that delay disease
progression, reduce readmission, and prolong survival.

PMID: 17356351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Fail Rev. 2012 May;17(3):345-53. doi: 10.1007/s10741-011-9256-0.

The dilemma, causes and approaches to avoid recurrent hospital readmissions for
patients with chronic heart failure.

Zaya M(1), Phan A, Schwarz ER.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA
90048, USA.

Heart failure is a progressive illness that carries significant morbidity and
mortality. This highly prevalent illness leads to frequent, costly
hospitalizations with approximately 50% of patients being readmitted within
6 months of initial hospitalization. While rehospitalization has been extensively
studied in the past, little progress has been made in terms of reducing
readmission rates of heart failure patients in the last decade despite increasing
costs with impending resource limitations. We discuss disease-centered,
physician-centered, and patient-centered factors that lead to rehospitalization
as well as community/resource availability factors that contribute to
rehospitalization of patients suffering from chronic heart failure. In addition, 
predictors of hospitalization and interventions that reduce hospitalization will 
be critically evaluated. With a complete understanding of heart failure
rehospitalization, we hope the future holds more effective ways to prevent heart 
failure progression and thus rehospitalization, improved risk-stratification
models to identify patients high-risk for rehospitalization, and sustained
interventions that are customized according to the etiology of the clinical
decline of heart failure patients that ultimately results in frequent
rehospitalizations.

PMID: 21643964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Med Care. 1999 May;37(5):490-501.

Hospital readmissions and quality of care.

Weissman JS(1), Ayanian JZ, Chasan-Taber S, Sherwood MJ, Roth C, Epstein AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Institute for Health
Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114, USA. weissman@gem.mgh.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Readmission rates are often proposed as markers for quality of care. 
However, a consistent link between readmissions and quality has not been
established.
OBJECTIVE: To test the relation of readmission to quality and the utility of
readmissions as hospital quality measures.
SUBJECTS: One thousand, seven hundred and fifty-eight Medicare patients
hospitalized in four states between 1991 to 1992 with pneumonia or congestive
heart failure (CHF).
DESIGN: Case control.
MEASURES: Related adverse readmissions (RARs), defined as readmissions that
indicate potentially sub-optimal care during initial hospitalization, were
identified from administrative data using readmission diagnoses and intervening
time periods designated by physician panels. We used linear regression to
estimate the association between implicit and explicit quality measures and
readmission status (RARs, non-RAR readmissions, and nonreadmissions), adjusting
for severity. We tested whether RARs were associated with inferior care and
performed simulations to determine whether RARs discriminated between hospitals
on the basis of quality.
RESULTS: Compared with nonreadmitted pneumonia patients, patients with RARs had
lower adjusted quality measured both by explicit (0.25 standardized units, P =
0.004) and implicit methods (0.17, P = 0.047). Adjusted differences for CHF
patients were 0.17 (P = 0.048) and 0.20 (P = 0.017), respectively. In some
analyses, patients with non-RAR readmissions also experienced lower quality.
However, rates of inferior quality care did not differ significantly by
readmission status, and simulations identified no meaningful relationship between
RARs and hospital quality of care.
CONCLUSIONS: RARs are statistically associated with lower quality of care.
However, neither RARs nor other readmissions appear to be useful tools for
identifying patients who experience inferior care or for comparing quality among 
hospitals.

PMID: 10335751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008 Mar;83(3):280-8. doi: 10.4065/83.3.280.

Outcomes of patients with stable heart failure undergoing elective noncardiac
surgery.

Xu-Cai YO(1), Brotman DJ, Phillips CO, Michota FA, Tang WH, Whinney CM,
Panneerselvam A, Hixson ED, Garcia M, Francis GS, Jaffer AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospital Medicine, The Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. caio@ccf.org

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate modern surgical outcomes in patients with stable heart
failure undergoing elective major noncardiac surgery and to compare the
experience of patients with heart failure who have reduced vs preserved left
ventricular ejection fraction (EF).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively studied 557 consecutive patients with
heart failure (192 EF less than or equal to 40% and 365 EF greater than 40%) and 
10,583 controls who underwent systematic evaluation by hospitalists in a
preoperative clinic before having major elective noncardiac surgery between
January 1, 2003, and March 31, 2006. We examined outcomes in the entire cohort
and in propensity-matched case-control groups.
RESULTS: Unadjusted 1-month postoperative mortality in patients with both types
of heart failure vs controls was 1.3% vs 0.4% (P equals .009), but this
difference was not significant in propensity-matched groups (P equals .09).
Unadjusted differences in mean hospital length of stay among heart failure
patients vs controls (5.7 vs 4.3 days; P less than .001) and 1-month readmission 
(17.8% vs 8.5%; P less than .001) were also markedly attenuated in
propensity-matched groups. Crude 1-year hazard ratios for mortality were 1.71
(95% confidence interval [CI], 1.5-2.0) for both types of heart failure, 2.1 (95%
CI, 1.7-2.6) in patients with heart failure who had EF less than or equal to 40%,
and 1.4 (95% CI, 1.2-1.8) in those who had EF greater than 40% (P less than .01
for all 3 comparisons); however, the differences were not significant in
propensity-matched groups (P equals .43).
CONCLUSION: Patients with clinically stable heart failure did not have high
perioperative mortality rates in association with elective major noncardiac
surgery, but they were more likely than patients without heart failure to have
longer hospital stays, were more likely to require hospital readmission, and had 
a substantial long-term mortality rate.

PMID: 18315993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Feb;147(2):718-23.e1. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.04.006. Epub 2013 May 8.

Home monitoring program reduces interstage mortality after the modified Norwood
procedure.

Siehr SL(1), Norris JK(1), Bushnell JA(1), Ramamoorthy C(2), Reddy VM(3), Hanley 
FL(3), Wright GE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, Calif. (2)Department of Anesthesia,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, Calif. (3)Division of
Pediatric Cardiac Surgery, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, Calif. (4)Division of Pediatric
Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Palo Alto, Calif. Electronic address: gewright@stanford.edu.

BACKGROUND: From 2002 to 2005, the interstage mortality after a modified Norwood 
procedure was 7% in our program. An interstage home monitoring program (HMP) was 
established to identify Norwood procedure patients at increased risk of
decompensation and to reduce interstage mortality.
METHODS: Results of the first 5 years of the Norwood HMP were reviewed
retrospectively. Interstage was defined as the time between Norwood hospital
discharge and admission for second stage surgical palliation. In the HMP,
families documented oxygen saturation, heart rate, weight, and feedings daily.
Nurse practitioners called each family at least weekly, and when issues arose,
action plans were determined based on symptom severity.
RESULTS: Between October 2005 and October 2010 there were 46 Norwood procedure
patients who survived to hospital discharge. All were enrolled in the HMP.
Forty-five patients had a Norwood procedure with right ventricle to pulmonary
artery conduit, and 1 patient had a modified Blalock-Taussig shunt. Interstage
survival was 100%. Nineteen patients (41%) were admitted interstage; 5 patients
were admitted twice, 1 patient was admitted 4 times. Seventeen patients (37%)
required interstage interventions. Eight patients (17%) required major
interventions: conduit stenting, aortic arch balloon angioplasty, emergent shunt,
or early Glenn surgery. Minor interventions included supplemental oxygen, blood
transfusion, intravenous hydration, diuresis, anti-arrhythmic therapy, or feeding
adjustments.
CONCLUSIONS: In the first 5 years of the HMP, all infants discharged after a
modified Norwood procedure survived the interstage period. The HMP altered
clinical management in 37% of patients. Home monitoring of oxygen saturation,
heart rate, weight, and feedings, along with comprehensive care coordination,
allowed timely interventions and reduced interstage mortality from 7% to 0%.

Copyright © 2014 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23663957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2014 Aug 7;14:97. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-14-97.

Using the LACE index to predict hospital readmissions in congestive heart failure
patients.

Wang H(1), Robinson RD, Johnson C, Zenarosa NR, Jayswal RD, Keithley J, Delaney
KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Integrative Emergency Service, John Peter
Smith Health Network, 1500 S, Main St, 76104 Fort Worth, TX, USA.
hwang01@jpshealth.org.

BACKGROUND: The LACE index has been used to predict the risk of unplanned
readmission within 30 days after hospital discharge in both medical and surgical 
patients. The aim of this study is to validate the accuracy of using the LACE
index in CHF patients.
METHODS: This was a retrospective study. The LACE index score was calculated on
each patient who was admitted to hospital due to an acute CHF exacerbation.
Operational and clinical variables were collected from patients including basic
clinical characteristics, length of hospitalization, comorbidities, number of
previous ED visits in the past 6 months before the index admission, and the
number of post discharge ED revisits at 30, 60, and 90 days. All variables were
analyzed by multivariate logistic regression to determine the association between
clinical variables and the hospital unplanned readmissions. C-statistic was used 
to discriminate those patients with high risk of readmissions.
RESULTS: Of the 253 patients included in the study, 24.50% (62/253) experienced
unplanned readmission to hospital within 30 days after discharge. The LACE index 
was slightly higher in patients readmitted versus patients not readmitted (12.17 
± 2.22 versus 11.80 ± 1.92, p = 0.199). Adjusted odds ratios based on logistic
regression of all clinical variables showed only the number of previous ED visits
(OR 1.79, 95% CI 1.30-2.47, p < 0.001), history of myocardial infarction (OR
2.51, 95% CI 1.02-6.21, p = 0.045), and history of peripheral vascular disease
(OR 10.75, 95% CI 1.52-75.73, p = 0.017) increased the risk of unplanned
readmission within 30 days of hospital discharge. However, patients with high
LACE scores (≥10) had a significantly higher rate of ED revisits (15.04% vs 0%)
within 30 days from the index discharge than those with low LACE scores (p =
0.030).
CONCLUSION: The LACE index may not accurately predict unplanned readmissions
within 30 days from hospital discharge in CHF patients. The LACE high risk index 
may have utility as a screening tool to predict high risk ED revisits after
hospital discharge.

PMCID: PMC4128541
PMID: 25099997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Fail Clin. 2014 Jul;10(3):503-10. doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2014.04.012.

Outcomes in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.

Poppe KK(1), Doughty RN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Institute for Health Innovation, University
of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand. (2)Department of
Medicine, National Institute for Health Innovation, University of Auckland,
Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand; Greenlane Cardiovascular Service, 
Auckland City Hospital, Private Bag 92024, Auckland 1142, New Zealand. Electronic
address: r.doughty@auckland.ac.nz.

Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HF-PEF) represents a heterogenous
group of patients with HF, more commonly affecting older women, with a history of
hypertension and, less commonly, coronary disease, than patients with HF with
reduced ejection fraction (HF-REF). Patients with HF-PEF have lower short-term
and longer-term mortality than patients with HF-REF. At present, therapeutic
interventions that have had proven benefits for patients with HF with reduced EF 
have not been shown to have similar benefits for patients with HF-PEF and there
remains an urgent need for new therapeutic strategies to improve the clinical
outcomes for patients with HF-PEF.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24975912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am Heart J. 2001 Aug;142(2):350-7.

Predictors of costs of caring for elderly patients discharged with heart failure.

Wexler DJ(1), Chen J, Smith GL, Radford MJ, Yaari S, Bradford WD, Krumholz HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Investments in programs to improve outcomes and reduce readmissions
for patients who survive hospitalization with heart failure will be economically 
most favorable for those who have the highest risk. Little information is
available, however, to stratify the risk of these patients incurring costs after 
discharge. In this study, we sought to determine correlates of costs in a
representative sample of patients with heart failure in the 6 months after
discharge.
METHODS: We reviewed medical records of 2181 patients aged > or = 65 years who
were discharged alive from 18 Connecticut hospitals in 1994 and 1995 with a
principal discharge diagnosis of heart failure. Outcomes 6 months after
discharge, including all-cause readmission and cost, heart failure-related
readmission and cost, and death, were obtained from the Medicare administrative
database. A 2-stage sample selection model was used to identify the independent
correlates of cost. Risk scores were calculated to identify subsets of patients
at risk for generating high costs.
RESULTS: On average, patients discharged with heart failure incurred costs of
$2388 resulting from heart failure-related admissions and $7101 resulting from
admissions from any cause during the 6 months after discharge. An average
admission for heart failure cost $7174, whereas an admission resulting from any
cause cost $8589. The multivariate models explained 7% of the variation in cost, 
although clinical characteristics such as recent heart failure admissions, kidney
failure, and hypertension were significant independent correlates of increased
cost. Older age and a history of stroke were independently associated with
decreased cost. Patients without any of the risk factors associated with
increased costs still incurred $1500 to $5000, on average, in the 6 months after 
discharge.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with heart failure generate substantial hospital costs in
the 6 months after discharge. Given the emerging evidence for effective programs 
to reduce readmission, investments in interventions that produce even modest
reductions in risk would be economically favorable.

PMID: 11479477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2004 Nov 1;94(9):1147-52.

Gender and risk of adverse outcomes in heart failure.

Lee WY(1), Capra AM, Jensvold NG, Gurwitz JH, Go AS; Epidemiology, Practice,
Outcomes, and Cost of Heart Failure (EPOCH) Study.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente of Northern California, Oakland,
California 94612-2304, USA.

Congestive heart failure (CHF) is the leading cause of hospitalization in the
elderly, and these patients are at high risk for subsequent hospitalization.
Whether gender affects the risk of rehospitalization in patients who have CHF is 
less well understood. We studied a random sample of 1,700 adults who had been
hospitalized with CHF (from July 1, 1999 to June 30, 2000) and identified all
readmissions through June 30, 2001. We used proportional hazards regression to
evaluate whether gender affects the risk of all-cause and CHF-specific
rehospitalization, after adjusting for differences in demographic
characteristics, health-related behaviors, co-morbid conditions, left ventricular
systolic function status, and use of CHF therapies. Among 1,591 adults who had
confirmed CHF, 752 were women (47.3%). Women were older than men (73 vs 71 years,
p <0.001) and more likely to have preserved systolic function (55.3% vs 40.9%, p 
<0.001), hypertension (83.1% vs 75.2%, p <0.001), and prior renal insufficiency
(46.8% vs 34.6%, p <0.001). No significant differences existed between women and 
men with respect to crude rates of any readmission (144.7 vs 134.6 per 100
person-years, p = 0.36) or CHF-specific readmission (39.9 vs 37.4 per 100
person-years, p = 0.65). After adjusting for potential confounders, there was no 
significant difference between women and men with respect to risk of any
readmission (adjusted hazard ratio 0.88, 95% confidence interval 0.76 to 1.02) or
readmission for CHF (adjusted hazard ratio 0.89, 95% confidence interval 0.71 to 
1.11). Among a contemporary, diverse population of patients who had CHF, rates of
readmission overall and for CHF remained high, but gender was not independently
associated with a differential risk of readmission.

PMID: 15518609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2014 Jan;30(1):47-55. doi: 10.1007/s10554-013-0294-7.
Epub 2013 Sep 17.

The prognostic value of a new tissue Doppler parameter in patients with heart
failure.

Mornoş C(1), Petrescu L, Ionac A, Cozma D.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Clinic, "Victor Babeş" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, G.Adam 
13A, Timişoara, Romania.

It has been shown a good accuracy to predict high left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure for a value >1.6 of a new tissue Doppler index, E/(E' × S'), including
the ratio between early diastolic transmitral and mitral annulus velocity (E/E'),
and the systolic mitral annulus velocity (S'). Our aim was to evaluate the
prognostic value of E/(E' × S') > 1.6 in patients with heart failure (HF).
Echocardiography was performed in 345 consecutive hospitalized patients with HF, 
in sinus rhythm, at hospital discharge and after 1 month. Worsening of E/(E' ×
S') was defined as any increase of baseline value. The primary end point
consisted of cardiac death or readmission due to HF worsening in long term
follow-up. At discharge, 153 patients (44.3%) presented E/(E' × S') ≤ 1.6 (group 
I) while 192 patients (55.7%) presented E/(E' × S') > 1.6 (group II). During the 
follow-up period (35.1 ± 8.7 months) the first cardiac event was cardiac death in
11 patients (3.1%) and readmission for HF in 179 patients (51.9%). The composite 
end point was significantly higher in group II than in group I (163 events, 84.9 
% vs. 27 events, 17.6%, p < 0.001). By multivariate Cox regression analysis,
E/(E' × S') > 1.6 was the best independent predictor of cardiac events (hazard
ratio = 4.46, 95% CI = 2.44-8.13, p = 0.001). Patients with E/(E' × S') > 1.6 at 
discharge and its worsening after 1 month have presented the worst prognosis (all
p < 0.05). In patients with HF, E/(E' × S') > 1.6 at hospital discharge is a
powerful predictor of clinical outcome particularly if it is associated with
worsening.

PMID: 24043477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2008 May;118(5):280-8.

Long-term prognosis and risk factors for cardiac adverse events in patients with 
chronic systolic heart failure due to hypertension.

Szyguła-Jurkiewicz B(1), Owczarek A, Duszańska A, Sikora J, Lekston A, Pudlo R,
Wojnicz R, Poloński L.

Author information: 
(1)III Department of Cardiology in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia,
Katowice, Poland. b.szygula@sccs.pl

OBJECTIVES: The long-term prognosis and predictors of adverse cardiac events in
hypertension-related chronic systolic heart failure (CHF) remain uncertain.
Therefore, we sought to determine the major adverse cardiac events (MACE) in this
group of patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: One hundred and thirty two patients (83% males, age 48.6
+/- 8.2 years) in NYHA class II and III with hypertension-related chronic CHF
were prospectively evaluated for three years. Hypertension was defined as blood
pressure > or = 140/90 mmHg documented clinically twice for at least 5 years
before the onset of CHF symptoms. All patients underwent coronary angiography to 
exclude coronary artery disease as a cause of CHF. Analysis of predictors of MACE
(death, urgent heart transplantation and re-admission to the hospital due to CHF 
progression) during the 3 years of follow up was performed.
RESULTS: After follow up the frequency of MACE was 41.7%. The independent
predictors of MACE occurrence were as follows: the symptoms of depression [hazard
ratio (HR) 2.58 (95% CI 1.44-4.63, p < 0.01)], end-diastolic diameter of the
right ventricular (EDDRV) [HR 1.07 (95% CI 1.02-1.12, p < 0.01)] and D-dimers [HR
2.24 (95% CI 1.08-4.67, p < 0.05)]. To define optimal prognostic accuracy of
EDDRV and D-dimers the receiver operating characteristics curve analysis was
performed. The cut-off for EDDRV was 28 mm (sensitivity 50%, specificity 67.6%,
area under curve [AUC] 0.64, p < 0.01) and for D-dimers 0.23 microg/ml,
(sensitivity 58%, specificity 64.2%, AUC 0.62, p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In analysed group the symptoms of depression, higher baseline right 
ventricular diastolic diameter and higher baseline D-dimers level were
independent predictors of MACE.

PMID: 18619178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2014 Mar;107(3):158-68. doi: 10.1016/j.acvd.2014.01.012.
Epub 2014 Mar 21.

Two-year outcome of patients after a first hospitalization for heart failure: A
national observational study.

Tuppin P(1), Cuerq A(2), de Peretti C(3), Fagot-Campagna A(2), Danchin N(4),
Juillière Y(5), Alla F(2), Allemand H(2), Bauters C(6), Drici MD(6), Hagège A(6),
Jondeau G(6), Jourdain P(6), Leizorovicz A(6), Paccaud F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Caisse Nationale d'Assurance Maladie des Travailleurs Salariés (CNAMTS),
Paris, France. Electronic address: philippe.tuppin@cnamts.fr. (2)Caisse Nationale
d'Assurance Maladie des Travailleurs Salariés (CNAMTS), Paris, France.
(3)Institut de Veille Sanitaire, Saint-Maurice, France. (4)Hôpital Européen
Georges-Pompidou, Université Paris Descartes, Département de Cardiologie, Paris, 
France. (5)Cardiologie, Institut Lorrain du Cœur et des Vaisseaux Louis-Mathieu, 
Nancy, France. (6)Heart Failure group from the CNAMTS, scientific council, Paris,
France.

BACKGROUND: National population-based management and outcome data for patients of
all ages hospitalized for heart failure have rarely been reported.
AIM: National population-based management and outcome of patients of all ages
hospitalized for heart failure have rarely been reported. The present study
reports these results, based on 77% of the French population, for patients
hospitalized for the first time for heart failure in 2009.
METHODS: The study population comprised French national health insurance general 
scheme beneficiaries hospitalized in 2009 with a principal diagnosis of heart
failure, after exclusion of those hospitalized for heart failure between 2006 and
2008 or with a chronic disease status for heart failure. Data were collected from
the national health insurance information system (SNIIRAM).
RESULTS: A total of 69,958 patients (mean age, 78 years; 48% men) were studied.
The hospital mortality rate was 6.4%, with 1-month, 1-year and 2-year survival
rates of 89%, 71% and 60%, respectively. Heart failure and all-cause
readmission-free rates were 55% and 43% at 1 year and 27% and 17% at 2 years,
respectively. Compared with a reference sample of 600,000 subjects, the age- and 
sex-standardized relative risk of death was 29 (95% confidence interval [CI]
28-29) at 2 years, 82 (95% CI 72-94) in subjects aged<50 years and 3 (95% CI 3-3)
in subjects aged ≥ 90 years. For subjects aged < 70 years who survived 1 month
after discharge, factors associated with a reduction in the 2-year mortality rate
were: female sex; age < 55 years; absence of co-morbidities; and use of
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers,
beta-blockers, lipid-lowering agents or oral anticoagulants during the month
following discharge. Poor prognostic factors were treatment with a loop diuretic 
before or after hospitalization and readmission for heart failure within 1 month 
after discharge.
CONCLUSIONS: This large population-based study confirms the severe prognosis of
heart failure and the need to promote the use of effective medications and
management designed to improve survival.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24662470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Angiology. 2015 Mar;66(3):271-7. doi: 10.1177/0003319714525656. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

A 2-year follow-up of oxidative stress levels in patients with ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction: a subanalysis of the ALPS-AMI study.

Abe N(1), Kashima Y(2), Izawa A(1), Motoki H(1), Ebisawa S(1), Miyashita Y(1),
Imamura H(3), Ikeda U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Nagano, Japan. (2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Shinshu University
School of Medicine, Nagano, Japan ykashima@shinshu-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Nagano, Japan.

We sought to determine whether serial measurements of oxidative stress levels
could serve as a predictive marker for cardiovascular (CV) events in patients
with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). Biological antioxidant
potential (BAP) levels were measured at admission and at 6, 12, and 24 months in 
69 patients with STEMI. The CV events abruptly increased 6 to 10 months after
successful percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with STEMI, and the
6-month BAP levels were significantly lower in patients with CV events (2456
μmol/L [interquartile range: 2237-2615 μmol/L]) than in those without (2849
μmol/L [2575-2987 μmol/L], P < .001). A decreased 6-month BAP level was an
independent and significant predictor of long-term CV events (hazard ratio =
2.45; 95% confidence intervals 1.10-5.78; P = .04). Our findings suggest that
serial changes in antioxidant capacity, assessed by BAP levels, may serve as a
predictive marker for CV events after STEMI.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 24642392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JACC Heart Fail. 2013 Jun;1(3):245-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2013.01.008. Epub 2013
Jun 3.

Validated, electronic health record deployable prediction models for assessing
patient risk of 30-day rehospitalization and mortality in older heart failure
patients.

Eapen ZJ(1), Liang L(2), Fonarow GC(3), Heidenreich PA(4), Curtis LH(2), Peterson
ED(2), Hernandez AF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina. Electronic address: zubin.eapen@duke.edu. (2)Duke Clinical
Research Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.
(3)University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California. (4)Palo Alto VA
Medical Center, Palo Alto, California.

OBJECTIVES: The study sought to derive and validate risk-prediction tools from a 
large nationwide registry linked with Medicare claims data.
BACKGROUND: Few clinical models have been developed utilizing data elements
readily available in electronic health records (EHRs) to facilitate "real-time"
risk estimation.
METHODS: Heart failure (HF) patients ≥ 65 years of age hospitalized in the
GWTG-HF (Get With The Guidelines-Heart Failure) program were linked with Medicare
claims from January 2005 to December 2009. Multivariable models were developed
for 30-day mortality after admission, 30-day rehospitalization after discharge,
and 30-day mortality/rehospitalization after discharge. Candidate variables were 
selected based on availability in EHRs and prognostic value. The models were
validated in a 30% random sample and separately in patients with reduced and
preserved ejection fraction (EF).
RESULTS: Among 33,349 patients at 160 hospitals, 3,002 (9.1%) died within 30 days
of admission, 7,020 (22.8%) were rehospitalized within 30 days of discharge, and 
8,374 (27.2%) died or were rehospitalized within 30 days of discharge. Compared
with patients classified as low risk, high-risk patients had significantly higher
odds of death (odds ratio [OR]: 8.82, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 7.58 to
10.26), rehospitalization (OR: 1.99, 95% CI: 1.86 to 2.13), and
death/rehospitalization (OR: 2.65, 95% CI: 2.44 to 2.89). The 30-day mortality
model demonstrated good discrimination (c-index 0.75) while the rehospitalization
and death/rehospitalization models demonstrated more modest discrimination
(c-indices of 0.59 and 0.62), with similar performance in the validation cohort
and for patients with preserved and reduced EF.
CONCLUSIONS: These predictive models allow for risk stratification of 30-day
outcomes for patients hospitalized with HF and may provide a validated,
point-of-care tool for clinical decision making.

Copyright © 2013 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24621877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Gen Intern Med. 2014 Oct;29(10):1333-40. doi: 10.1007/s11606-014-2862-5. Epub
2014 May 14.

National patterns of risk-standardized mortality and readmission after
hospitalization for acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, and pneumonia:
update on publicly reported outcomes measures based on the 2013 release.

Suter LG(1), Li SX, Grady JN, Lin Z, Wang Y, Bhat KR, Turkmani D, Spivack SB,
Lindenauer PK, Merrill AR, Drye EE, Krumholz HM, Bernheim SM.

Author information: 
(1)Yale New Haven Health Services Corporation/Center for Outcomes Research and
Evaluation, 1 Church Street, Suite 200, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA,
Lisa.suter@yale.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services publicly reports
risk-standardized mortality rates (RSMRs) within 30-days of admission and, in
2013, risk-standardized unplanned readmission rates (RSRRs) within 30-days of
discharge for patients hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), heart
failure (HF), and pneumonia. Current publicly reported data do not focus on
variation in national results or annual changes.
OBJECTIVE: Describe U.S. hospital performance on AMI, HF, and pneumonia mortality
and updated readmission measures to provide perspective on national performance
variation.
DESIGN: To identify recent changes and variation in national hospital-level
mortality and readmission for AMI, HF, and pneumonia, we performed
cross-sectional panel analyses of national hospital performance on publicly
reported measures.
PARTICIPANTS: Fee-for-service Medicare and Veterans Health Administration
beneficiaries, 65 years or older, hospitalized with principal discharge diagnoses
of AMI, HF, or pneumonia between July 2009 and June 2012. RSMRs/RSRRs were
calculated using hierarchical logistic models risk-adjusted for age, sex,
comorbidities, and patients' clustering among hospitals.
RESULTS: Median (range) RSMRs for AMI, HF, and pneumonia were 15.1% (9.4-21.0%), 
11.3% (6.4-17.9%), and 11.4% (6.5-24.5%), respectively. Median (range) RSRRs for 
AMI, HF, and pneumonia were 18.2% (14.4-24.3%), 22.9% (17.1-30.7%), and 17.5%
(13.6-24.0%), respectively. Median RSMRs declined for AMI (15.5% in 2009-2010,
15.4% in 2010-2011, 14.7% in 2011-2012) and remained similar for HF (11.5% in
2009-2010, 11.9% in 2010-2011, 11.7% in 2011-2012) and pneumonia (11.8% in
2009-2010, 11.9% in 2010-2011, 11.6% in 2011-2012). Median hospital-level RSRRs
declined: AMI (18.5% in 2009-2010, 18.5% in 2010-2011, 17.7% in 2011-2012), HF
(23.3% in 2009-2010, 23.1% in 2010-2011, 22.5% in 2011-2012), and pneumonia
(17.7% in 2009-2010, 17.6% in 2010-2011, 17.3% in 2011-2012).
CONCLUSIONS: We report the first national unplanned readmission results
demonstrating declining rates for all three conditions between 2009-2012.
Simultaneously, AMI mortality continued to decline, pneumonia mortality was
stable, and HF mortality experienced a small increase.

PMCID: PMC4175654
PMID: 24825244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ J. 2009 Oct;73(10):1893-900. Epub 2009 Jul 31.

Characteristics and outcomes of hospitalized patients with heart failure and
reduced vs preserved ejection fraction. Report from the Japanese Cardiac Registry
of Heart Failure in Cardiology (JCARE-CARD).

Tsuchihashi-Makaya M(1), Hamaguchi S, Kinugawa S, Yokota T, Goto D, Yokoshiki H, 
Kato N, Takeshita A, Tsutsui H; JCARE-CARD Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research and Informatics, Research Institute,
International Medical Center of Japan, Tokyo. miyuki_t@cardiol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Circ J. 2009 Dec;73(12):2365.

BACKGROUND: Heart failure (HF) with preserved ejection fraction (EF) is common.
We compared the characteristics, treatments, and outcomes in HF patients with
reduced vs preserved EF by using the national registry database in Japan.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The Japanese Cardiac Registry of Heart Failure in Cardiology
(JCARE-CARD) is a prospective observational study in a broad sample of patients
hospitalized with worsening HF. The study enrolled 2,675 patients from 164
hospitals with an average of 2.4 years of follow-up. Patients with preserved EF
(EF >or=50% by echocardiography; n=429) were more likely to be older, female,
have hypertension and atrial fibrillation, and less likely to have ischemic
etiology compared with those with reduced EF (EF <40%; n=985). Unadjusted risk of
in-hospital mortality (6.5% vs 3.9%; P=0.03) and post-discharge mortality (22.7% 
vs 17.8%; P=0.058) was slightly higher in patients with preserved EF, which,
however, were not different after multivariable adjustment. Patients with
preserved EF had similar rehospitalization rates (36.2% vs 33.4%; P=0.515)
compared with patients with reduced EF.
CONCLUSIONS: HF patients with preserved EF had a similar mortality risk and
equally high rates of rehospitalization as those with reduced EF. Effective
management strategies are critically needed to be established for this type of
HF.

PMID: 19644216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am Heart J. 2000 Jan;139(1 Pt 1):72-7.

Predictors of readmission among elderly survivors of admission with heart
failure.

Krumholz HM(1), Chen YT, Wang Y, Vaccarino V, Radford MJ, Horwitz RI.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, the Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
harlan.krumholz@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: Readmission rates for patients discharged with heart failure approach
50% within 6 months. Identifying factors to predict risk of readmission in these 
patients could help clinicians focus resource-intensive disease management
efforts on the high-risk patients.
METHODS: The study sample included patients 65 years of age or older with a
principal discharge diagnosis of heart failure who were admitted to 18
Connecticut hospitals in 1994 and 1995. We obtained patient and clinical data
from medical record review. We determined outcomes within 6 months after
discharge, including all-cause readmission, heart failure-related readmission,
and death, from the Medicare administrative database. We evaluated 2176 patients,
including 1129 in the derivation cohort and 1047 in the validation cohort.
RESULTS: Of 32 patient and clinical factors examined, 4 were found to be
significantly associated with readmission in a multivariate model. They were
prior admission within 1 year, prior heart failure, diabetes, and creatinine
level >2.5 mg/dL at discharge. The event rates according to number of risk
predictors were similar in the derivation and the validation sets for all
outcomes. In the validation cohort, rates for all-cause readmission and combined 
readmission or death were 26% and 31% in patients with no risk predictors, 48%
and 54% in patients with 1 or 2 risk predictors, and 59% and 65% in patients with
3 or all risk predictors.
CONCLUSIONS: Few patient and clinical factors predict readmission within 6 months
after discharge in elderly patients with heart failure. Although we were unable
to identify a group of patients at very low risk, a group of high-risk patients
were identified for whom resource-intensive interventions designed to improve
outcomes may be justified.

PMID: 10618565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. BMJ. 2013 Nov 20;347:f6571. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f6571.

Hospital readmission performance and patterns of readmission: retrospective
cohort study of Medicare admissions.

Dharmarajan K(1), Hsieh AF, Lin Z, Bueno H, Ross JS, Horwitz LI, Barreto-Filho
JA, Kim N, Suter LG, Bernheim SM, Drye EE, Krumholz HM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Columbia University
Medical Center, 630 West 168th Street, Box 93, PH 10-203, New York, NY 10032,
USA.

Comment in
    BMJ. 2013;347:f7478.
    BMJ. 2014;348:g1150.

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether high performing hospitals with low 30 day risk
standardized readmission rates have a lower proportion of readmissions from
specific diagnoses and time periods after admission or instead have a similar
distribution of readmission diagnoses and timing to lower performing
institutions.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING: Medicare beneficiaries in the United States.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients aged 65 and older who were readmitted within 30 days after
hospital admission for heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, or pneumonia
in 2007-09.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Readmission diagnoses were classified with a modified
version of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services' condition categories, 
and readmission timing was classified by day (0-30) after hospital discharge.
Hospital 30 day risk standardized readmission rates over the three years of study
were calculated with public reporting methods of the US federal government, and
hospitals were categorized with bootstrap analysis as having high, average, or
low readmission performance for each index condition. High and low performing
hospitals had ≥ 95% probability of having an interval estimate respectively less 
than or greater than the national 30 day readmission rate over the three year
period of study. All remaining hospitals were considered average performers.
RESULTS: For readmissions in the 30 days after the index admission, there were
320,003 after 1,291,211 admissions for heart failure (4041 hospitals), 102,536
after 517,827 admissions for acute myocardial infarction (2378 hospitals), and
208,438 after 1,135,932 admissions for pneumonia (4283 hospitals). The
distribution of readmissions by diagnosis was similar across categories of
hospital performance for all three conditions. High performing hospitals had
fewer readmissions for all common diagnoses. Median time to readmission was
similar by hospital performance for heart failure and acute myocardial
infarction, though was 1.4 days longer among high versus low performing hospitals
for pneumonia (P<0.001). Findings were unchanged after adjustment for other
hospital characteristics potentially associated with readmission patterns.
CONCLUSIONS: High performing hospitals have proportionately fewer 30 day
readmissions without differences in readmission diagnoses and timing, suggesting 
the possible benefit of strategies that lower risk of readmission globally rather
than for specific diagnoses or time periods after hospital stay.

PMCID: PMC3898430
PMID: 24259033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Patient Educ Couns. 2010 Mar;78(3):297-315. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2010.01.016. Epub 
2010 Mar 3.

Effectiveness of self-management interventions on mortality, hospital
readmissions, chronic heart failure hospitalization rate and quality of life in
patients with chronic heart failure: a systematic review.

Ditewig JB(1), Blok H, Havers J, van Veenendaal H.

Author information: 
(1)The Dutch institute for Healthcare Improvement, CBO, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
jb.ditewig@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: This review examined the effectiveness of self-management
interventions compared to usual care on mortality, all-cause hospital
readmissions, chronic heart failure hospitalization rate and quality of life in
patients with chronic heart failure.
METHODS: A systematic review was performed. MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and the
Cochrane Library were searched between 1996 and 2009. Randomized controlled
trials were selected evaluating self-management interventions designed for
patients with chronic heart failure. Outcomes of interest are mortality,
all-cause hospital readmissions, chronic heart failure hospitalization rate and
quality of life.
RESULTS: Nineteen randomized controlled trials were identified. The effectiveness
of heart failure management programs initiating self-management interventions in 
patients with chronic heart failure indicate a positive effect, although not
always significant, on reduction of numbers of all-cause hospital readmitted
patients and due to chronic heart failure, decrease in mortality and increasing
quality of life.
CONCLUSION: This systematic review found that current available published studies
show methodological shortcomings impairing validation of the effectiveness of
self-management interventions on mortality, all-cause hospital readmissions,
chronic heart failure hospitalization rate and quality of life in patients with
chronic heart failure.
PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: Further research should determine independent effects of
self-management interventions and different combinations of interventions on
clinical and patient reported outcomes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20202778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1985 Sep;33(9):595-601.

Hospital readmissions among the elderly.

Gooding J, Jette AM.

This paper investigates the six-month hospital readmission rates among 444
patients 65 years of age or older admitted to a large metropolitan teaching
hospital who had a primary discharge diagnosis of cerebrovascular disease, hip
fracture, or congestive heart failure. Twenty-four percent were readmitted to the
same institution one or more times during the six-month follow-up. Striking
variability was observed in use of hospitals across these diagnostic groups.
Patients with a primary diagnosis of congestive heart failure were at highest
risk of hospital readmission (36%). Multiple readmissions among the congestive
heart failure group were prevalent. These preliminary data suggest that hospital 
readmission among the aged is a complex multifaceted phenomena.

PMID: 4031337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Arch Intern Med. 2001 Aug 13-27;161(15):1849-56.

Relationship of depression to increased risk of mortality and rehospitalization
in patients with congestive heart failure.

Jiang W(1), Alexander J, Christopher E, Kuchibhatla M, Gaulden LH, Cuffe MS,
Blazing MA, Davenport C, Califf RM, Krishnan RR, O'Connor CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
jiang001@mc.duke.edu

Comment in
    Arch Intern Med. 2002 Feb 11;162(3):362.
    Arch Intern Med. 2002 Feb 11;162(3):362-4.

BACKGROUND: Patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) may have a high
prevalence of depression, which may increase the risk of adverse outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence and relationship of depression to outcomes
of patients hospitalized with CHF.
METHODS: We screened patients aged 18 years or older having New York Heart
Association class II or greater CHF, an ejection fraction of 35% or less, or
both, admitted between March 1, 1997, and June 30, 1998, to the cardiology
service of one hospital. Patients with a Beck Depression Inventory score of 10 or
higher underwent a modified National Institute of Mental Health Diagnostic
Interview Schedule to identify major depressive disorder. Primary care providers 
coordinated standard treatment for CHF and other medical and psychiatric
disorders. We assessed all-cause mortality and readmission (rehospitalization)
rates 3 months and 1 year after depression assessment. Logistic regression
analyses were used to evaluate the independent prognostic value of depression
after adjustment for clinical risk factors.
RESULTS: Of 374 patients screened, 35.3% had a Beck Depression Inventory score of
10 or higher and 13.9% had major depressive disorder. Overall mortality was 7.9% 
at 3 months and 16.2% at 1 year. Major depression was associated with increased
mortality at 3 months (odds ratio, 2.5 vs no depression; P =.08) and at 1 year
(odds ratio, 2.23; P =.04) and readmission at 3 months (odds ratio, 1.90; P =.04)
and at 1 year (odds ratio, 3.07; P =.005). These increased risks were independent
of age, New York Heart Association class, baseline ejection fraction, and
ischemic etiology of CHF.
CONCLUSIONS: Major depression is common in patients hospitalized with CHF and is 
independently associated with a poor prognosis.

PMID: 11493126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2007 Sep;68(3):154-64.

[BNP-guided therapy optimizes the timing of discharge and the medium term risk
stratification in patients admitted for congestive heart failure].

[Article in Italian]

Valle R(1), Aspromonte N, Carbonieri E, De Michele G, Di Tano G, Giovinazzo P,
Cioè R, Di Giacomo T, Milani L, Noventa F, Chiatto M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro per lo scompenso cardiaco, Unità operativa complessa di Cardiologia,
Ospedale civile, San Donà di Piave. robertovalle@libero.it

BACKGROUND: Congestive heart failure (HF) is one of the most important cause of
hospitalizations and is associated with high cost. Despite a consistent body of
data demonstrating the benefits of drug therapy in HF, persistently high rates of
readmission, especially within six months of discharge, continue to be
documented. Neurohormonal activation characterizes the disease; plasma brain
natriuretic peptide (BNP), is correlated with the severity of left ventricular
dysfunction and relates to outcome.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to evaluate if plasma levels of BNP would
provide an index to guide drug treatment and to predict medium-term prognosis in 
HF patients (pts) after hospital discharge.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We evaluated 200 consecutive pts (age 77 +/- 10 (35-96)
years, 49% male versus 51% female) hospitalized for HF (DRG 127). Standard
echocardiography was performed and left ventricular systolic/diastolic function
was assessed; plasma BNP levels were measured with a rapid point-of-care assay
(Triage BNP Test, Biosite Inc, San Diego, CA) on days 1 and after initial
treatment. Using a cut-off of 240 pg/ml and/or changes in plasma BNP (days 2-3
after admission), 2 groups were identified: the low BNP group-responders (n = 68,
BNP < 240 pg/ml and/or > or = 30% reduction) and the high BNP group-non
responders (n = 132, BNP > or = 240 pg/ml and/or < 30% reduction). The high BNP
group showed a different pattern of clinical variables according to the severity 
of the disease New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class, left
ventricular ejection fraction, ischemic etiology and age. A sustained elevation
of plasma BNP (> 240 pg/mL) indicated the presence of a clinical unstable
condition requiring further intervention whereas pts with low BNP values were
discharged after 24 hours. During a mean follow-up period of 3 months, there were
62 cardiac events, including 15 cardiac deaths, 22 readmissions for worsening
heart failure and 25 clinical decompensation requiring diuretic treatment. The
incidence of clinical events was significantly greater in pts with higher levels 
of BNP (admission and discharge) than in those with lower levels (42% vs. 10%)
and plasma values > 500 pg/ml identified a subgroup at high risk of death.
CONCLUSIONS: The influence of BNP in the clinical course and prognosis of
patients hospitalized for HF has not been studied. After initial treatment pts
need to be risk stratified by means of the BNP test, to guide further management 
and to identify subjects with poor prognosis. An aggressive therapeutic and
follow-up strategy may be justified for pts with high BNP levels and/or no
changes after hospital admission for worsening HF. The changes in plasma BNP
level at discharge were significantly related to cardiac events.

PMID: 18361212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012 Feb;93(2):559-64. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2011.10.058.

Impact of preoperative angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor use on clinical
outcomes after cardiac surgery.

Ouzounian M(1), Buth KJ, Valeeva L, Morton CC, Hassan A, Ali IS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. mouzouni@dal.ca

BACKGROUND: Controversy exists about whether preoperative angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor (ACEi) therapy is associated with adverse outcomes after
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).
METHODS: We analyzed the outcomes of consecutive patients who underwent isolated 
CABG between 1998 and 2007 at a single institution. We used multivariable models 
to examine the association between preoperative ACEi therapy and in-hospital and 
long-term outcomes.
RESULTS: Of the 5946 patients undergoing isolated CABG during the study period,
3,262 (54.9%) were treated with an ACEi preoperatively and 2,684 (45.1%) were
not. Median follow-up was 3.8 years. Patients treated with an ACEi preoperatively
were more likely to have diabetes, hypertension, an ejection fraction of less
than 40%, and recent myocardial infarction (all p<0.0001). They were less likely 
to have pre-existing renal failure (p=0.004) or require an urgent or emergent
CABG (p=0.03). Postoperative use of an inotrope (26% vs 20%, p<0.0001) or
intra-aortic balloon pump (1.8% vs 1.1%, p=0.03) was more frequent in patients
treated preoperatively with an ACEi; however, preoperative ACEi use was not an
independent predictor of in-hospital mortality (odds ratio [OR], 1.1; p=0.76),
prolonged length of stay in the intensive care unit (OR, 0.9; p=0.09), or
new-onset renal failure (OR, 0.7; p=0.09). Furthermore, preoperative use of an
ACEi had no independent association with long-term survival (p=0.54) or freedom
from acute coronary syndrome (p=0.07). However, it was associated with an
increased risk of readmission for heart failure over time (hazard ratio, 1.2;
p=0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: We found no association between preoperative ACEi therapy and
adverse in-hospital outcomes or long-term survival after CABG. Preoperative ACEi 
therapy appears to be safe in patients undergoing CABG.

Copyright © 2012 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22269723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2003 Jul-Aug;4(4):195-9.

Associations among processes and outcomes of care for Medicare nursing home
residents with acute heart failure.

Hutt E(1), Frederickson E, Ecord M, Kramer AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Care Policy and Research, University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center, Denver, 80206, USA. Evelyn.Hutt@uchsc.edu

Comment in
    J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2003 Jul-Aug;4(4):220-1.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize Medicare skilled nursing facility (SNF) residents who 
become acutely ill with heart failure (HF) and assess the association between the
outcomes of rehospitalization and mortality, and severity of the acute
exacerbation, comorbidity, and processes of care.
DESIGN: SNF medical record review of Medicare patients who developed an acute
exacerbation of heart failure (HF) during the 90 days following nursing home
admission.
SETTING: A total of 58 SNFs in 5 states during 1994 and 1997.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients with 156 episodes of acute HF among 4693 random Medicare
nursing home admissions.
MEASUREMENTS: Demographic variables, symptoms, signs, comorbidity, nursing home
characteristics, nurse staffing ratios, and processes of care were compared
between acute HF subjects transferred to hospital and those not transferred; and 
between subjects who died within 30 days of an acute exacerbation and those who
survived.
RESULTS: After adjusting for age, disease severity, and comorbidity, residents
whose change in condition was evaluated during the night shift were more likely
to be hospitalized (OR 4.20, 95%CI 1.01-17.50). Residents who were prescribed an 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or who received an order for skilled
nursing observation more often than once a shift were 1/3 as likely to die as
those who did not (OR 0.303, 95%CI 0.11-0.82), after adjusting for hypotension,
delirium, do not resuscitate orders, and prior hospital length of stay.
CONCLUSION: For residents who develop an acute exacerbation of HF during a SNF
stay, there is an association between attributes of nursing home care and the
outcomes of rehospitalization and mortality.

PMID: 12837140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2013 Jul;6(4):444-50. doi:
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.111.000101.

Hospital strategies associated with 30-day readmission rates for patients with
heart failure.

Bradley EH(1), Curry L, Horwitz LI, Sipsma H, Wang Y, Walsh MN, Goldmann D, White
N, Piña IL, Krumholz HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Policy and Management, Yale School of Public Health, New 
Haven, CT 06520, USA. Elizabeth.bradley@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: Reducing hospital readmission rates is a national priority; however, 
evidence about hospital strategies that are associated with lower readmission
rates is limited. We sought to identify hospital strategies that were associated 
with lower readmission rates for patients with heart failure.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using data from a Web-based survey of hospitals
participating in national quality initiatives to reduce readmission (n=599; 91%
response rate) during 2010-2011, we constructed a multivariable linear regression
model, weighted by hospital volume, to determine strategies independently
associated with risk-standardized 30-day readmission rates (RSRRs) adjusted for
hospital teaching status, geographic location, and number of staffed beds.
Strategies that were associated with lower hospital RSRRs included the following:
(1) partnering with community physicians or physician groups to reduce
readmission (0.33% percentage point lower RSRRs; P=0.017), (2) partnering with
local hospitals to reduce readmissions (0.34 percentage point; P=0.020), (3)
having nurses responsible for medication reconciliation (0.18 percentage point;
P=0.002), (4) arranging follow-up appointments before discharge (0.19 percentage 
point; P=0.037), (5) having a process in place to send all discharge paper or
electronic summaries directly to the patient's primary physician (0.21 percentage
point; P=0.004), and (6) assigning staff to follow up on test results that return
after the patient is discharged (0.26 percentage point; P=0.049). Although
statistically significant, the magnitude of the effects was modest with
individual strategies associated with less than half a percentage point reduction
in RSRRs; however, hospitals that implemented more strategies had significantly
lower RSRRs (reduction of 0.34 percentage point for each additional strategy).
CONCLUSIONS: Several strategies were associated with lower hospital RSRRs for
patients with heart failure.

PMCID: PMC3802532
PMID: 23861483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2012 Jan;470(1):166-71. doi: 10.1007/s11999-011-1957-0.

Decreased length of stay after TKA is not associated with increased readmission
rates in a national Medicare sample.

Vorhies JS(1), Wang Y, Herndon JH, Maloney WJ, Huddleston JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Stanford Medicine Outpatient Center, 450
Broadway Street, Mailcode 6324, Redwood City, CA 94063, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is a trend toward decreasing length of hospital stay (LOS)
after TKA although it is unclear whether this trend is detrimental to the overall
postoperative course. Such information is important for future decisions related 
to cost containment.
QUESTIONS/PURPOSES: We determined whether decreases in LOS after TKA are
associated with increases in readmission rates.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the rates and reasons for
readmission and LOS for 4057 Medicare TKA patients from 2002 to 2007. We
abstracted data from the Medicare Patient Safety Monitoring System. Hierarchical 
generalized linear modeling was used to assess the odds of changing readmission
rates and LOS over time, controlling for changes in patient demographic and
clinical variables.
RESULTS: The overall readmission rate in the 30 days after discharge was 228/4057
(5.6%). The 10 most common reasons for readmission were congestive heart failure 
(20.4%), chronic ischemic heart disease (13.9%), cardiac dysrhythmias (12.5%),
pneumonia (10.8%), osteoarthrosis (9.4%), general symptoms (7.4%), acute
myocardial infarction (7.0%), care involving other specified rehabilitation
procedure (6.3%), diabetes mellitus (6.3%), and disorders of fluid, electrolyte, 
and acid-base balance (5.9%); the top 10 causes did not include venous
thromboembolism syndromes. We found no difference in the readmission rate between
the periods 2002-2004 (5.5%) and 2005-2007 (5.8%) but a reduction in LOS between 
the periods 2002-2004 (4.1 ± 2.0 days) and 2005-2007 (3.8 ± 1.7 days).
CONCLUSIONS: The most common causes for readmission were cardiac-related. A
reduction in LOS was not associated with an increase in the readmission rate in
this sample. Optimization of cardiac status before discharge and routine primary 
care physician followup may lead to lower readmission rates.

PMCID: PMC3237965
PMID: 21720934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circulation. 2011 Jul 19;124(3):289-96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.011130.
Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Mortality and readmission of patients with heart failure, atrial fibrillation, or
coronary artery disease undergoing noncardiac surgery: an analysis of 38 047
patients.

van Diepen S(1), Bakal JA, McAlister FA, Ezekowitz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Mazankowski Alberta Heart Institute, Division of Cardiology, Department of
Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2011 Jul 19;124(3):276-7.
    Circulation. 2012 Feb 14;125(6):e360; author reply e361.

BACKGROUND: The postoperative risks for patients with coronary artery disease
(CAD) undergoing noncardiac surgery are well described. However, the risks of
noncardiac surgery in patients with heart failure (HF) and atrial fibrillation
(AF) are less well known. The purpose of this study is to compare the
postoperative mortality of patients with HF, AF, or CAD undergoing major and
minor noncardiac surgery.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Population-based data were used to create 4 cohorts of
consecutive patients with either nonischemic HF (NIHF; n=7700), ischemic HF (IHF;
n=12 249), CAD (n=13 786), or AF (n=4312) who underwent noncardiac surgery
between April 1, 1999, and September 31, 2006, in Alberta, Canada. The main
outcome was 30-day postoperative mortality. The unadjusted 30-day postoperative
mortality was 9.3% in NIHF, 9.2% in IHF, 2.9% in CAD, and 6.4% in AF (each versus
CAD, P<0.0001). Among patients undergoing minor surgical procedures, the 30-day
postoperative mortality was 8.5% in NIHF, 8.1% in IHF, 2.3% in CAD, and 5.7% in
AF (P<0.0001). After multivariable adjustment, postoperative mortality remained
higher in NIHF, IHF, and AF patients than in those with CAD (NIHF versus CAD:
odds ratio 2.92; 95% confidence interval 2.44 to 3.48; IHF versus CAD: odds ratio
1.98; 95% confidence interval 1.70 to 2.31; AF versus CAD: odds ratio 1.69; 95%
confidence interval 1.34 to 2.14).
CONCLUSIONS: Although current perioperative risk prediction models place greater 
emphasis on CAD than HF or AF, patients with HF or AF have a significantly higher
risk of postoperative mortality than patients with CAD, and even minor procedures
carry a risk higher than previously appreciated.

PMID: 21709059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Cardiol. 2009 Nov;32(11):E33-8. doi: 10.1002/clc.20490.

Usefulness of brain natriuretic peptide level at implant in predicting mortality 
in patients with advanced but stable heart failure receiving cardiac
resynchronization therapy.

El-Saed A(1), Voigt A, Shalaby A.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15240, USA.

BACKGROUND: Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level has emerged as a predictor of
death and hospital readmission in patients with heart failure (HF). The value of 
baseline BNP assessment in advanced HF patients receiving cardiac
resynchronization defibrillator therapy (CRT-D) has not been firmly established.
HYPOTHESIS: We hypothesized that a baseline BNP level would predict all cause
mortality and HF hospitalization in HF patients receiving cardiac
resynchronization therapy.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review of all patients having BNP assessment prior
to implantation of a CRT-D for standard indications during 2004 and 2005 was
conducted at the Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare System. The primary
endpoint was all-cause mortality and the secondary endpoint was HF-related
hospitalization. We used findings from the receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curve to define low (<492 pg/mL) and high (> or =492 pg/mL) BNP groups.
RESULTS: Out of 173 CRT-D recipients, 115 patients (mean age 67.0 +/- 10.7 years,
New York Heart Association [NYHA] class 2.9 +/- 0.3, left ventricular ejection
fraction [LVEF] 22.5% +/- 9.6%, QRS 148.3 +/- 30.4 ms) had preimplantation BNP
measured (mean 559 +/- 761 pg/mL and median 315 pg/mL). During a mean follow-up
time of 17.5 +/- 6.5 mo, 27 deaths (23.5%) and 31 HF hospitalizations (27.0%)
were recorded. Compared to those with low BNP (n = 74), those of high BNP (n =
41) were older, had lower LVEF, higher creatinine levels, suffered more deaths,
and HF hospitalizations. In multivariate regression models, higher BNP remained a
significant predictor of both the primary endpoint (hazard ratio [HR]: 2.89, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] 1.06-7.88, p = 0.038) and secondary endpoint (HR: 4.23, 
95% CI: 1.68-10.60, p = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: Baseline BNP independently predicted mortality and HF
hospitalization in a predominantly older white male population of advanced HF
patients receiving CRT-D. Elevated BNP levels may identify a vulnerable HF
population with a particularly poor prognosis despite CRT-D.

PMID: 19816874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. BMC Geriatr. 2006 Aug 9;6:12.

Determinants of short and long term functional recovery after hospitalization for
community-acquired pneumonia in the elderly: role of inflammatory markers.

El Solh A(1), Pineda L, Bouquin P, Mankowski C.

Author information: 
(1)Western New York Respiratory Research Center, 462 Grider Street, Buffalo, NY
14215, USA. solh@buffalo.edu

BACKGROUND: Hospitalization for older patients with community-acquired pneumonia 
(CAP) is associated with functional decline. Little is know about the
relationship between inflammatory markers and determinants of functional status
in this population. The aim of the study is to investigate the association
between tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, C-reactive protein (CRP) and
Activities of Daily Living, and to identify risk factors associated with one year
mortality or hospital readmission.
METHODS: 301 consecutive patients hospitalized for CAP (mean age 73.9 +/- 5.3
years) in a University affiliated hospital over 18 month period were included.
All patients were evaluated on admission to identify baseline demographic,
microbiological, cognitive and functional characteristics. Serum levels for
TNF-alpha and CRP were collected at the same time. Reassessment of functional
status at discharge, and monthly thereafter till 3 months post discharge was
obtained and compared with preadmission level to document loss or recovery of
functionality. Outcome was assessed by the composite endpoint of hospital
readmission or death from any cause up to one year post hospital discharge.
RESULTS: 36% of patients developed functional decline at discharge and 11% had
persistent functional impairment at 3 months. Serum TNF-alpha (odds ratio [OR]
1.12, 95% CI 1.08-1.15; p < 0.001) and the Charlson Index (OR = 1.39, 95% CI 1.14
to 1.71; p = 0.001) but not age, CRP, or cognitive status were independently
associated with loss of functionality at the time of hospital discharge. Lack of 
recovery in functional status at 3 months was associated with impaired cognitive 
ability and preadmission comorbidities. In Cox regression analysis, persistent
functional impairment at 3 months, impaired cognitive function, and the Charlson 
Index were highly predictive of one year hospital readmission or death.
CONCLUSION: Serum TNF-alpha levels can be useful in determining patients at risk 
for functional impairment following hospitalization from CAP. Old patients with
impaired cognitive function and preexisting comorbidities who exhibit delay in
functional recovery at 3 months post discharge may be at high risk for hospital
readmission and death. With the scarcity of resources, a future risk
stratification system based on these findings might be proven helpful to target
older patients who are likely to benefit from interventional strategies.

PMCID: PMC1557854
PMID: 16899118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2012 Jun 18;12:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-12-43.

Patterns of beta-blocker intensification in ambulatory heart failure patients and
short-term association with hospitalization.

Allen LA(1), Magid DJ, Zeng C, Peterson PN, Clarke CL, Shetterly S, Brand DW,
Masoudi FA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO, USA. Larry.Allen@ucdenver.edu

BACKGROUND: In response to the short-term negative inotropic and chronotropic
effects of β-blockers, heart failure (HF) guidelines recommend initiating
β-blockers at low dose with gradual uptitration as tolerated to doses used in
clinical trials. However, patterns and safety of β-blocker intensification in
routine practice are poorly described.
METHODS: We described β-blocker intensification among Kaiser Colorado enrollees
with a primary discharge diagnosis of HF between 2001-2009. We then assessed
β-blocker intensification in the 30 days prior to first hospital readmission for 
cases compared to the same time period following index hospitalization for
non-rehospitalized matched controls. In separate analysis of the subgroup
initiated on β-blocker after index hospital discharge, we compared adjusted rates
of 30-day hospitalization following initiation of high versus low dose β-blocker.
RESULTS: Among 3,227 patients, median age was 76 years and 37% had ejection
fraction ≤ 40% (LVSD). During a median follow up of 669 days, 14% were never on
β-blocker, 21% were initiated on β-blocker, 43% were discharged on β-blocker but 
never uptitrated, and 22% had discharge β-blocker uptitrated; 63% were readmitted
and 49% died. β-blocker intensification occurred in the 30 days preceding
readmission for 39 of 1,674 (2.3%) readmitted cases compared to 27 (1.6%) of
matched controls (adjusted OR 1.36, 95% CI 0.81-2.27). Among patients initiated
on therapy, readmission over the subsequent 30 days occurred in 6 of 155 (3.9%)
prescribed high dose and 9 of 513 (1.8%) prescribed low dose β-blocker (adjusted 
OR 3.10, 95% CI 1.02-9.40). For the subgroup with LVSD, findings were not
significantly different.
CONCLUSION: While β-blockers were intensified in nearly half of patients
following hospital discharge and high starting dose was associated with increased
readmission risk, the prevailing finding was that readmission events were rarely 
preceded by β-blocker intensification. These data suggest that β-blocker
intensification is not a major precipitant of hospitalization, provided
recommended dosing is followed.

PMCID: PMC3413533
PMID: 22709128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Ann Intern Med. 2011 Sep 20;155(6):361-7. doi:
10.7326/0003-4819-155-6-201109200-00004.

Health care system delay and heart failure in patients with ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction treated with primary percutaneous coronary intervention:
follow-up of population-based medical registry data.

Terkelsen CJ(1), Jensen LO, Tilsted HH, Trautner S, Johnsen SP, Vach W, Bøtker
HE, Thuesen L, Lassen JF.

Author information: 
(1)Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: In patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), 
delay between contact with the health care system and initiation of reperfusion
therapy (system delay) is associated with mortality, but data on the associated
risk for congestive heart failure (CHF) among survivors are limited.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between system delay and the risk for
readmissions or outpatient contacts due to CHF after primary percutaneous
coronary intervention (PPCI) in patients with STEMI.
DESIGN: Historical follow-up study using population-based medical registries.
SETTING: Western Denmark.
PATIENTS: Patients with STEMI who were transported by emergency medical service
from 1 January 1999 to 7 February 2010 and treated with PPCI within 12 hours of
symptom onset and who had a system delay of 6 hours or less (n = 7952). The
median duration of follow-up was 3.1 years.
MEASUREMENTS: Cumulative incidence of readmissions or outpatient contacts due to 
CHF was determined by using competing-risk regression analysis, with death as the
competing risk. Crude and adjusted cause-specific hazard ratios for readmissions 
or outpatient contacts due to CHF were determined for system delay and other
covariates.
RESULTS: System delays of 60 minutes or less (n = 451), 61 to 120 minutes (n =
3457), 121 to 180 minutes (n = 2655), and 181 to 360 minutes (n = 1389)
corresponded with long-term risks for readmissions or outpatient contacts due to 
CHF of 10.1%, 10.6%, 12.3%, and 14.1%, respectively (P < 0.001). In multivariable
analysis, system delay was an independent predictor of readmissions or outpatient
contacts due to CHF (adjusted hazard ratio per hour increase in delay, 1.10 [95% 
CI, 1.02 to 1.17]).
LIMITATION: In any nonrandomized study, there are risks for selection bias and
residual confounding.
CONCLUSION: In patients with STEMI, shorter delay to PPCI is associated with
lower risk for readmissions or outpatient contacts due to CHF during follow-up.

PMID: 21930853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2001 Sep;12(9):990-5.

Relationship between rehospitalization and future death in patients treated for
potentially lethal arrhythmia.

Hallstrom AP(1), Greene HL, Wilkoff BL, Zipes DP, Schron E, Ledingham RB;
Antiarrhythmics Versus Implantable Defibrillators (AVID) Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Seattle, USA. aph@u.washington.edu

INTRODUCTION: It is generally considered that death is the only appropriate
endpoint to evaluate interventions for preventing death; however, this belief may
be based on the previous use of inappropriate or inadequate surrogates for death.
The aim of this study was to evaluate whether rehospitalization following
implementation of an intervention is a reasonable surrogate for death.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The time from discharge following intervention to
rehospitalization was evaluated for 997 patients discharged after baseline
hospitalization in the Antiarrhythmics Versus Implantable Defibrillators Trial.
The relationship between rehospitalization for various reasons and subsequent
death was compared in the two treatment arms to assess the adequacy of
rehospitalization as a surrogate for death. Included were rehospitalization for: 
any reason, a cardiac problem, a noncardiac problem, new or worsened congestive
heart failure (CHF), an acute coronary syndrome, and a cardiac procedure. For all
of the reasons except cardiac procedure, rehospitalization was associated with a 
substantially increased hazard for subsequent death. Rehospitalization for new or
worsened CHF was most closely (that is, temporally) related to subsequent death
and was the only reason for rehospitalization, which fully explained the
treatment effect of implantable cardiac defibrillators compared with
antiarrhythmic drugs on death.
CONCLUSION: Rehospitalization is a significant risk factor for subsequent death. 
However, only rehospitalization for new or worsened CHF appears to be a potential
surrogate for death in the setting of antiarrhythmic interventions.

PMID: 11573708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JAMA Intern Med. 2015 Apr;175(4):559-65. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.7756.

Functional impairment and hospital readmission in Medicare seniors.

Greysen SR(1), Stijacic Cenzer I(2), Auerbach AD(1), Covinsky KE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hospital Medicine, University of California, San Francisco.
(2)Division of Geriatric Medicine, University of California, San Francisco3San
Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, California. (3)Division
of Geriatric Medicine, University of California, San Francisco3San Francisco
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, California4Associate Editor, JAMA
Internal Medicine.

Comment in
    JAMA Intern Med. 2015 Apr;175(4):565-6.

IMPORTANCE: Medicare currently penalizes hospitals for high readmission rates for
seniors but does not account for common age-related syndromes, such as functional
impairment.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the effects of functional impairment on Medicare hospital
readmissions given the high prevalence of functional impairments in
community-dwelling seniors.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We created a nationally representative cohort 
of 7854 community-dwelling seniors in the Health and Retirement Study, with
22,289 Medicare hospitalizations from January 1, 2000, through December 31, 2010.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Outcome was 30-day readmission assessed by Medicare
claims. The main predictor was functional impairment determined from the Health
and Retirement Study interview preceding hospitalization, stratified into the
following 5 levels: no functional impairments, difficulty with 1 or more
instrumental activities of daily living, difficulty with 1 or more activities of 
daily living (ADL), dependency (need for help) in 1 to 2 ADLs, and dependency in 
3 or more ADLs. Adjustment variables included age, race/ethnicity, sex, annual
income, net worth, comorbid conditions (Elixhauser score from Medicare claims),
and prior admission. We performed multivariable logistic regression to adjust for
clustering at the patient level to characterize the association of functional
impairments and readmission.
RESULTS: Patients had a mean (SD) age of 78.5 (7.7) years (range, 65-105 years); 
58.4% were female, 84.9% were white, 89.6% reported 3 or more comorbidities, and 
86.0% had 1 or more hospitalizations in the previous year. Overall, 48.3% had
some level of functional impairment before admission, and 15.5% of
hospitalizations were followed by readmission within 30 days. We found a
progressive increase in the adjusted risk of readmission as the degree of
functional impairment increased: 13.5% with no functional impairment, 14.3% with 
difficulty with 1 or more instrumental activities of daily living (odds ratio
[OR], 1.06; 95% CI, 0.94-1.20), 14.4% with difficulty with 1 or more ADL (OR,
1.08; 95% CI, 0.96-1.21), 16.5% with dependency in 1 to 2 ADLs (OR, 1.26; 95% CI,
1.11-1.44), and 18.2% with dependency in 3 or more ADLs (OR, 1.42; 95% CI,
1.20-1.69). Subanalysis restricted to patients admitted with conditions targeted 
by Medicare (ie, heart failure, myocardial infarction, and pneumonia) revealed a 
parallel trend with larger effects for the most impaired (16.9% readmission rate 
for no impairment vs 25.7% for dependency in 3 or more ADLs [OR, 1.70; 95% CI,
1.04-2.78]).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Functional impairment is associated with increased
risk of 30-day all-cause hospital readmission in Medicare seniors, especially
those admitted for heart failure, myocardial infarction, or pneumonia. Functional
impairment may be an important but underaddressed factor in preventing
readmissions for Medicare seniors.

PMCID: PMC4388787 [Available on 2016-04-01]
PMID: 25642907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Card Fail. 2012 Jul;18(7):534-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2012.05.003.

Central sleep apnea is a predictor of cardiac readmission in hospitalized
patients with systolic heart failure.

Khayat R(1), Abraham W, Patt B, Brinkman V, Wannemacher J, Porter K, Jarjoura D.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Heart Program, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
rami.khayat@osumc.edu

BACKGROUND: Hospitalized heart failure patients have a high readmission rate. We 
sought to determine the independent risk due to central sleep apnea (CSA) of
readmission in patients with systolic heart failure (SHF).
METHODS AND RESULTS: This was a prospective observational cohort study of
hospitalized patients with SHF. Patients underwent sleep studies during their
hospitalization and were followed for 6 months to determine their rate of cardiac
readmissions; 784 consecutive patients were included; 165 patients had CSA and
139 had no sleep-disordered breathing (SDB); the remainder had obstructive sleep 
apnea (OSA). The rate ratio for 6 months' cardiac readmissions was 1.53 (95%
confidence interval 1.1-2.2; P = .03) in CSA patients compared with no SDB. This 
rate ratio was adjusted for systolic function, type of cardiomyopathy, age,
weight, sex, diabetes, coronary disease, length of stay, admission sodium,
creatinine, hemoglobin, blood pressure, and discharge medications. Severe OSA was
also an independent predictor of readmissions with an adjusted rate ratio of 1.49
(P = .04).
CONCLUSION: In this first evaluation of the impact of SDB on cardiac readmissions
in heart failure, CSA was an independent risk factor for 6 months' cardiac
readmissions. The effect size of CSA exceeded that of all known predictors of
heart failure readmissions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3482612
PMID: 22748486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Future Cardiol. 2014 Mar;10(2):221-7. doi: 10.2217/fca.14.9.

Using galectin-3 to reduce heart failure rehospitalization.

Xue Y(1), Maisel A, Peacock WF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Increasing attention is being paid towards reducing short-term heart failure
readmissions in recent years. Biomarkers such as galectin-3 are likely to play
pivotal roles in future heart failure management strategies as they can provide
objective information on various pathophysiologic processes involved in heart
failure. Galectin-3 is a biomarker of inflammation and fibrosis, which is
strongly associated with adverse remodeling of the myocardium and subsequent left
ventricular dysfunction. Clinically, elevated galectin-3 levels are associated
with increased risk for short- and long-term risk for mortality and heart failure
readmission. Galectin-3 can provide incremental predictive value for adverse
events over natriuretic peptides. Although significant work is still required to 
further define the role of galectin-3, it has the potential to become an
important part of future heart failure management algorithms by helping to
provide an individualized risk profile, which can be used to optimize resource
allocation and improve treatment outcomes.

PMID: 24762249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Apr 7;53(14):1167-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.12.037.

Heart failure in Hispanics.

Vivo RP(1), Krim SR, Cevik C, Witteles RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
Lubbock, Texas 79430, USA. rpvivo_upsilon@yahoo.com

Although large-scale heart failure (HF) studies in Hispanic Americans are
lacking, some compelling data indicate that they are a particularly vulnerable
population and underscore the need for further research. Hispanics comprise the
largest and fastest-growing ethnic group in the U.S., in whom the impact of this 
burgeoning public health problem may be magnified. Current data show that
Hispanics with HF are more likely to be younger and underinsured than
non-Hispanic whites. They have higher rates of readmissions but have lower
in-hospital and short-term mortality rates. Epidemiologic studies demonstrate
that Hispanics have excessive rates of diabetes, obesity, dyslipidemia, and
metabolic syndrome. Although hypertension and ischemic heart disease are
established risk factors in this ethnic group, it may be considered that insulin 
resistance plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of HF in Hispanics,
accounting for their inordinate cardiometabolic risk burden and the growing
evidence of novel metabolic risk factors for HF. Hispanics encounter multiple
barriers to health care influenced by socioeconomic, linguistic, and cultural
factors that, in turn, have an adverse impact on disease prognosis. Recognition
of predominant risk factors and health care disparities in this population is
crucial to tailoring appropriate management strategies. This review summarizes
epidemiologic and clinical data on Hispanics with HF, details risk factors and
health care impediments, and presents an agenda for future investigation.

PMID: 19341856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Echocardiography. 2014 Apr;31(4):434-40. doi: 10.1111/echo.12390. Epub 2013 Oct
15.

Peak myocardial acceleration during isovolumic relaxation time predicts the
occurrence of rehospitalization in chronic heart failure: data from the Daunia
heart failure registry.

Correale M(1), Totaro A, Ferraretti A, Passero T, De Rosa F, Musaico F, Ieva R,
Di Biase M, Brunetti ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) may be useful in identifying subjects at
higher risk among patients with chronic heart failure (CHF). The clinical role of
new developed TDI parameters, however, still needs to be documented.
METHODS: A total of 113 consecutive patients with CHF enrolled in the Daunia
heart failure registry underwent echocardiography assessment and were followed
prospectively for 234 ± 262 days. Conventional echocardiography and TDI
parameters were calculated. We also calculated peak myocardial acceleration
during isovolumic relaxation time (pIVA[r]) derived from TDI (pIVV(r)/AT).
RESULTS: Subjects readmitted for worsening HF were characterized by lower levels 
of pIVA(r) (0.8 ± 0.3 vs. 1.3 ± 0.5 m/s(2) , P < 0.001). pIVA(r) levels predicted
the incidence of readmission for worsening HF during follow-up (HR 0.78, 95%
confidence interval 0.64-0.96, P < 0.05), even after multivariable analysis. The 
assessment of pIVA(r) in addition to left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF)
and E/E' provided additional prognostic value (Log Rank P < 0.05). The presence
of abnormal pIVA(r), LVEF, and E/E' levels identified subjects with a higher risk
of hospitalization for worsening dyspnea during follow-up than those with 2
abnormal marker levels or 0-1 (Log Rank P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Peak myocardial acceleration during isovolumic relaxation time may
represent an independent adjunctive tool for the risk stratification of patients 
with CHF.

© 2013, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24128310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Home Healthc Nurse. 1999 Jun;17(6):373-81.

Predictors of hospital readmission among the elderly with congestive heart
failure.

Hoskins LM(1), Walton-Moss B, Clark HM, Schroeder MA, Thiel L Sr.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Catholic University of America, Washington, DC 20064, USA. 
hoskins@cua.edu

This study compared elderly patients with congestive heart failure discharged
from home healthcare to the home vs. those rehospitalized. The rate of
rehospitalization in this sample of 117 was 27%. Significant predictors of
rehospitalization included number of home healthcare days, number of previous
hospitalizations, and the services of a home health aide. Implications include
the timing and nature of home health visits.

PMID: 10562014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am Heart J. 2012 Sep;164(3):365-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2012.06.010. Epub 2012 Aug
17.

Predicting the risk of unplanned readmission or death within 30 days of discharge
after a heart failure hospitalization.

Au AG(1), McAlister FA, Bakal JA, Ezekowitz J, Kaul P, van Walraven C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: The accuracy of current models to predict the risk of unplanned
readmission or death after a heart failure (HF) hospitalization is uncertain.
METHODS: We linked four administrative databases in Alberta to identify all
adults discharged alive after a HF hospitalization between April 1999 and 2009.
We randomly selected one episode of care per patient and evaluated the accuracy
of five administrative data-based models (4 already published, 1 new) for
predicting risk of death or unplanned readmission within 30 days of discharge.
RESULTS: Over 10 years, 59652 adults (mean age 76, 50% women) were discharged
after a HF hospitalization. Within 30 days of discharge, 11199 (19%) died or had 
an unplanned readmission. All 5 administrative data models exhibited moderate
discrimination for this outcome (c-statistic between 0.57 and 0.61). Neither
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)-endorsed model exhibited
substantial improvements over the Charlson score for prediction of 30-day
post-discharge death or unplanned readmission. However, a new model incorporating
length of index hospital stay, age, Charlson score, and number of emergency room 
visits in the prior 6 months (the LaCE index) exhibited a 20.5% net
reclassification improvement (95% CI, 18.4%-22.5%) over the Charlson score and a 
19.1% improvement (95% CI, 17.1%-21.2%) over the CMS readmission model.
CONCLUSIONS: None of the administrative database models are sufficiently accurate
to be used to identify which HF patients require extra resources at discharge.
Models which incorporate length of stay such as the LaCE appear superior to
current CMS-endorsed models for risk adjusting the outcome of "death or
readmission within 30 days of discharge".

Copyright © 2012 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22980303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2013 Mar;6(2):193-202. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.112.000075.
Epub 2013 Feb 6.

Outcomes and care of patients with acute heart failure syndromes and cardiac
troponin elevation.

Braga JR(1), Tu JV, Austin PC, Chong A, You JJ, Farkouh ME, Ross HJ, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Peter Munk Cardiac Centre, University Health Network, 
Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Cardiac troponins (cTn) may be elevated among patients with acute
heart failure syndromes (AHFS). However, the optimal approach to management of
AHFS with elevated cTn is unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We compared the care and outcomes of 13 656 patients with
AHFS seeking care in the emergency department stratified by presence (cTn+,
n=1845, 13.5%) or absence (cTn-) of elevated troponin. Clinically abstracted data
on patients who were admitted or discharged from the emergency department in
Ontario, Canada (April 1999 to March 2001 and April 2004 to March 2007) were
examined. In an exploratory 2:1 propensity-matched analysis, we examined whether 
early coronary revascularization (within 14 days of emergency department visit)
was associated with survival, stratified by cTn status. For cTn+ AHFS, rates of
coronary angiography (21.8 vs 11.4 patients/100 person-years; P<0.001) and
coronary revascularization (8.8 vs 3.2 patients/100 person-years; P<0.001) were
higher than cTn-. Instantaneous 30-day adjusted hazard ratios for cTn+ versus
cTn- patients were 9.17 (95% confidence interval [CI], 8.31-10.12; P<0.001) for
death, 5.14 (95% CI, 4.66-5.67; P<0.001) for cardiovascular readmission, and
13.08 (95% CI, 10.95-15.62; P<0.001) for ischemic heart disease hospitalization. 
In propensity-matched analysis of 143 individuals with cTn+ AHFS, early coronary 
revascularization was associated with reduced mortality (adjusted hazard ratio,
0.29; 95% CI, 0.09-0.92; P=0.036) compared with those who were not
revascularized. Mortality was not significantly reduced among 210 cTn- patients
undergoing early coronary revascularization (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.61; 95% CI,
0.36-1.03; P=0.065).
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated cTn was associated with increased risk of death and
cardiovascular hospitalizations. Highly selected cTn+ patients who underwent
early coronary revascularization for obstructive coronary artery disease
experienced improved survival.

PMID: 23388112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002 Feb;50(2):223-9.

Precipitants of emergency room visits and acute hospitalization in short-stay
medicare nursing home residents.

Hutt E(1), Ecord M, Eilertsen TB, Frederickson E, Kramer AM.

Author information: 
(1)Center on Aging Research Section, University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center, Denver 80206, USA. evelyn.hutt@uchsc.edu

OBJECTIVES: To determine what precipitates rehospitalization for residents who
become acutely ill in the first 90 days of a nursing home (NH) admission.
DESIGN: NH medical record review comparing acutely ill Medicare admissions
transferred back to hospital with those not transferred.
SETTING: Sixty skilled nursing facilities in five states during 1994.
PARTICIPANTS: Six hundred thirty-six residents who became acutely ill with
urinary tract infection (UTI), pneumonia, or congestive heart failure (CHF)
during the first 90 days of their nursing home admission were identified from
2,414 random NH Medicare admissions, excluding those with orders not to be
hospitalized.
MEASUREMENTS: Diagnosis, age, gender, advance care directives, nursing shift
during which problem occurred, comorbidity, symptoms, and signs of acutely ill NH
residents transferred to the hospital or emergency department were compared with 
those not transferred.
RESULTS: Rates of hospitalization varied markedly by acute illness: 11 of
residents with UTI, 46 with pneumonia, and 58 with an exacerbation of CHF (P<
.001). In stratified multivariate analysis, older age decreased the odds of
rehospitalization only for CHF. Male gender increased odds of hospitalization for
pneumonia (odds ratio (OR) = 2.94) and decreased odds of hospitalization for CHF 
(OR = 0.28). Do not resuscitate orders were negatively associated with
hospitalization only for pneumonia (OR = 0.23), whereas weekend and evening/night
shifts increased odds of hospitalization for UTI. Each illness had its own set of
symptoms, signs, and comorbidities associated with hospitalization.
CONCLUSIONS: Whether an acutely ill NH Medicare patient was rehospitalized
depended primarily on the particular illness. The relative importance of age,
gender, shift, advance care directives, symptom severity, signs, and comorbid
illnesses varied by diagnosis.

PMID: 12028202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Ann Intern Med. 2014 May 6;160(9):603-11. doi: 10.7326/M13-1879.

Comparative effectiveness of cardiac resynchronization therapy with an
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator versus defibrillator therapy alone: a
cohort study.

Masoudi FA, Mi X, Curtis LH, Peterson PN, Curtis JP, Fonarow GC, Hammill SC,
Heidenreich PA, Al-Khatib SM, Piccini JP, Qualls LG, Hernandez AF.

BACKGROUND: Trials comparing implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) therapy
with cardiac resynchronization therapy with a defibrillator (CRT-D) are limited
to selected patients treated at centers with extensive experience.
OBJECTIVE: To compare outcomes after CRT-D versus ICD therapy in contemporary
practice.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study using the National Cardiovascular Data
Registry's ICD Registry linked with Medicare claims.
SETTING: 780 U.S. hospitals implanting both CRT-D and ICD devices.
PATIENTS: 7090 propensity-matched patients older than 65 years with reduced left 
ventricular ejection fraction (&lt;0.35) and prolonged QRS duration on
electrocardiography (≥120 ms) having CRT-D or ICD implantation between 1 April
2006 and 31 December 2009.
MEASUREMENTS: Risks for death, readmission, and device-related complications over
3 years.
RESULTS: Compared with ICD therapy, CRT-D was associated with lower risks for
mortality (cumulative incidence, 25.7% vs. 29.8%; adjusted hazard ratio [HR],
0.82 [99% CI, 0.73 to 0.93]), all-cause readmission (cumulative incidence, 68.6% 
vs. 72.8%; adjusted HR, 0.86 [CI, 0.81 to 0.93]), cardiovascular readmission
(cumulative incidence, 45.0% vs. 52.4%; adjusted HR, 0.80 [CI, 0.73 to 0.88]),
and heart failure readmission (cumulative incidence, 24.3% vs. 29.4%; adjusted
HR, 0.78 [CI, 0.69 to 0.88]). It was also associated with greater risks for
device-related infection (cumulative incidence, 1.9% vs. 1.0%; adjusted HR, 1.90 
[CI, 1.07 to 3.37]). The lower risks for heart failure readmission associated
with CRT-D compared with ICD therapy were most pronounced among patients with
left bundle branch block or a QRS duration at least 150 ms and in women.
LIMITATIONS: Patients were not randomly assigned to treatment groups, and few
patients could be propensity-matched. The findings may not extend to younger
patients or those outside of fee-for-service Medicare.
CONCLUSION: In older patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction and
prolonged QRS duration, CRT-D was associated with lower risks for death and
readmission than ICD therapy alone.
PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.

PMID: 24798523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2010 Jan 15;105(2):229-34. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2009.09.008.

Effect of Beta-blocker therapy on rehospitalization rates in women versus men
with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction.

Farasat SM(1), Bolger DT, Shetty V, Menachery EP, Gerstenblith G, Kasper EK,
Najjar SS.

Author information: 
(1)MedStar Research Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Cardiol. 2010 May 1;105(9):1358.

Beta blockers are empirically used in many patients with heart failure (HF) and
preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) because they allow more time for diastolic
filling and because they improve outcomes in patients with systolic HF. However, 
recent data suggest that impaired chronotropic and vasodilator responses to
exercise, which can worsen with beta blockade, may play a key role in the
pathophysiology of HFpEF. We prospectively examined the association between
beta-blocker therapy after hospitalization for decompensated HF and HF
rehospitalization at 6 months in 66 consecutive patients with HFpEF (71 +/- 13
years old, 68% women, 42% Black). Subjects were stratified based on receiving
(BB+; 15 men, 28 women) or not receiving (BB-) beta-blockers at hospital
discharge. In men, HF rehospitalization occurred less frequently in the BB+ than 
in the BB- group, albeit nonsignificantly (20% vs 50%, p = 0.29). In women, HF
rehospitalization occurred more frequently in the BB+ than in the BB- group (75% 
vs 18%, p <0.001). In univariate analyses, discharge beta-blocker was associated 
with HF rehospitalization in women (odds ratio [OR] 14.00, 95% confidence
interval [CI] 3.09 to 63.51, p = 0.001), but not in men (OR 0.25, 95% CI 0.03 to 
1.92, p = 0.18). In a forward logistic regression model that offered all
univariate predictors of HF rehospitalization, discharge beta blocker remained an
independent predictor of HF rehospitalization in women (OR 11.06, 95% CI 1.98 to 
61.67, p = 0.006). In conclusion, this small observational study suggests that
beta-blocker therapy may be associated with a higher risk of HF rehospitalization
in women with HFpEF. The risks and benefits of beta-blocker therapy in patients
with HFpEF should be evaluated in randomized, controlled trials.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20102924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2010 May;3(3):e13; author reply e17. doi:
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.110.947614.

Letter by DiDomenico et al regarding article, "Recent national trends in
readmission rates after heart failure hospitalization".

DiDomenico RJ, Kondos GT, Dickens C.

Comment on
    Circ Heart Fail. 2010 Jan;3(1):97-103.

PMID: 20484187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2011 May;4(3):308-16. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.110.959031. 
Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Socioeconomic status, Medicaid coverage, clinical comorbidity, and
rehospitalization or death after an incident heart failure hospitalization:
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities cohort (1987 to 2004).

Foraker RE(1), Rose KM, Suchindran CM, Chang PP, McNeill AM, Rosamond WD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, USA. rforaker@cph.osu.edu

Comment in
    Circ Heart Fail. 2011 May;4(3):244-5.

BACKGROUND: Among patients with heart failure (HF), early readmission or death
and repeat hospitalizations may be indicators of poor disease management or more 
severe disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We assessed the association of neighborhood median household
income (nINC) and Medicaid status with rehospitalization or death in the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities cohort study (1987 to 2004) after an incident
HF hospitalization in the context of individual socioeconomic status and
evaluated the relationship for modification by demographic and comorbidity
factors. We used generalized linear Poisson mixed models to estimate
rehospitalization rate ratios and 95% CIs and Cox regression to estimate hazard
ratios (HRs) and 95% CIs of rehospitalization or death. In models controlling for
race and study community, sex, age at HF diagnosis, body mass index,
hypertension, educational attainment, alcohol use, and smoking, patients with a
high burden of comorbidity who were living in low-nINC areas at baseline had an
elevated hazard of all-cause rehospitalization (HR, 1.40; 95% CI, 1.10 to 1.77), 
death (HR, 1.36; 95% CI, 1.02 to 1.80), and rehospitalization or death (HR, 1.36;
95% CI, 1.08 to 1.70) as well as increased rates of hospitalization compared to
those with a high burden of comorbidity living in high-nINC areas. Medicaid
recipients with a low level of comorbidity had an increased hazard of all-cause
rehospitalization (HR, 1.19; 95% CI, 1.05 to 1.36) and rehospitalization or death
(HR, 1.21; 95% CI, 1.07 to 1.37) and a higher rate of repeat hospitalizations
compared to non-Medicaid recipients.
CONCLUSIONS: Comorbidity burden appears to influence the association among nINC, 
Medicaid status, and rehospitalization and death in patients with HF.

PMCID: PMC3098576
PMID: 21430286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2010 Sep;12(9):990-4. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfq076. Epub 2010 May
22.

Mechanical circulatory support in patients of advanced age.

Drews T(1), Stepanenko A, Dandel M, Buz S, Lehmkuhl HB, Hetzer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, Deutsches Herzzentrum
Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

AIMS: In recent years, non-pulsatile assist devices have been increasingly used
for long-term circulatory support. However, it remains to be established whether 
pulsatile and non-pulsatile systems can ensure a similarly low rate of
complications for extended periods of time in elderly patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Of 174 patients implanted between June 1991 and January 2009
[mean age: 65 +/- 3.7 (60-80) years], 64 were on pulsatile (39 Berlin Heart
EXCOR, 18 Novacor, 4 LionHeart, and 3 HeartMate I) and 110 on non-pulsatile
assist devices (65 Berlin Heart INCOR, 18 DeBakey, 14 HeartMate II, 7 DuraHeart, 
and 6 Jarvik2000). In the pulsatile group, the mean support time was 157 +/- 343 
(1-1836) days, and in the non-pulsatile group 281 +/- 336 (1-1619) days (P <
0.05). The 1-year survival was 15% in the pulsatile group and 36% in the
non-pulsatile group, and 2-year survival was 12 and 26%, respectively (P < 0.05).
In the pulsatile group, 11 patients (17%) were supported for >6 months, 7
patients (11%) for >1 year, and 3 patients (5%) for >2 years, and 3 patients
underwent heart transplantation, 3 were weaned, and 3 still have a device. In the
non-pulsatile group, 46 patients (42%) were supported for >6 months, 34 (28%) for
>1 year, and 14 (13%) for >2 years, and 17 patients are still on support, 9
underwent transplantation, and 3 were weaned.
CONCLUSION: Although both types of device can be used for extended periods of
time, non-pulsatile systems have a significantly higher survival rate in elderly 
patients. They allow elderly patients additional years of life in their familiar 
environment.

PMID: 20495203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Crit Care Nurs Q. 2009 Jan-Mar;32(1):33-43; quiz 44-5. doi:
10.1097/01.CNQ.0000343132.34942.64.

Factors impacting readmissions of older patients with heart failure.

Hodges P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Acute Nursing Care, The University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78229, USA. hodgesp@uthssa.edu

The overall purpose of this study was to explore individual perceptions of life
purpose, health-related quality of life, and hospital readmissions among older
adults with heart failure. The problem addressed the heart failure patient's lack
of understanding about the diagnosis, treatment, management, and predictors of
heart failure within a framework of the older adult's life purpose and
health-related quality of life. The goal was to provide a foundation for
development of safe and effective holistic intervention strategies to decrease
costly hospital readmissions for patients with heart failure. The research design
was descriptive, correlational mixed method using a qualitative and quantitative 
concurrent triangulation. The setting for the study was San Antonio, Texas, the
seventh largest city in the United States. The purposive sample consisted of 41
male and female participants aged 60 years and older. The research findings
suggest a moderate, significant relationship between life purpose and
health-related quality of life. Higher numbers of hospital readmissions were
significantly related to more difficulty with management of heart failure and a
poor sense of life purpose. This study may contribute to science by providing
useful information that may be used in the management of heart failure among
older adults.

PMID: 19077807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Nurs Care Qual. 2014 Apr-Jun;29(2):115-23. doi: 10.1097/NCQ.0000000000000042.

Predictors of excess heart failure readmissions: implications for nursing
practice.

Stamp KD(1), Flanagan J, Gregas M, Shindul-Rothschild J.

Author information: 
(1)Boston College, School of Nursing, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts (Drs Stamp,
Flanagan, and Shindul-Rothschild); and Research Services, Boston College,
Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts (Dr Gregas).

In this study of California, Massachusetts, and New York hospitals, 6 factors
predicted 27.6% of readmissions for patients with heart failure (HF). We found
that higher admissions per bed, teaching hospitals, and poor nurse-patient
communication increased HF readmissions. Conversely, the HF readmissions were
lower when nurse staffing was greater, more patients reported receiving discharge
information, and among hospitals in California. The implications for nursing
practice in the delivery of care to patients with HF are discussed.

PMID: 24378355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2003 Mar;5(2):201-9.

Factors influencing the length of hospital stay of patients with heart failure.

Wright SP(1), Verouhis D, Gamble G, Swedberg K, Sharpe N, Doughty RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of 
Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand. sp.wright@auckland.ac.nz

INTRODUCTION: Heart failure (HF) is characterised by frequent hospital admissions
and prolonged length of hospital stay. Admissions for HF have increased over the 
last decade while length of stay has decreased; the reasons for this change in
length of stay are uncertain. This study investigates the effect of
patient-related variables, in-hospital progress and complications on length of
stay.
METHODS: Patients admitted to Auckland Hospital general medical service and
randomised into the Auckland Heart Failure Management Programme were included in 
this study.
RESULTS: One hundred and ninety-seven patients were included in this study. Mean 
age 73 years, mean left ventricular ejection fraction 32%; 52% had one or more
previous HF admissions and 75% were New York Heart Association class IV at
admission. Median length of hospital stay was 6 days (IQR 4, 9) which is
comparable to the national average from New Zealand admission databases. Longer
than average length of stay, defined as >6 days, was associated with the presence
of peripheral congestion, duration of treatment with intravenous diuretic, the
development of renal impairment, other acute medical problems at admission,
iatrogenic complications during hospital stay, and social problems requiring
intervention. Factors independently associated with length of stay in the top
quartile (>10 days) on logistic regression included the presence of oedema at
admission (OR 10.5), change in weight during stay (OR 1.3), duration of treatment
with iv diuretic (OR 7.5), the development of renal impairment (OR 9.8),
concurrent respiratory problems requiring specific treatment (OR 3.8), and social
problems requiring intervention (OR 6.8).
CONCLUSIONS: Peripheral congestion, concomitant acute medical problems requiring 
specific treatment, the development of renal impairment and the presence of
social problems were related to a longer than average length of hospital stay.
Multivariate models only partly explained variance in hospital stay, suggesting
the importance of pre-admission and post-discharge factors, including the
healthcare environment, the availability of primary and secondary care resources,
and the threshold for hospital admission.

PMID: 12644013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Tex Heart Inst J. 2012;39(4):500-6.

Potential role of plasma myeloperoxidase level in predicting long-term outcome of
acute myocardial infarction.

Kaya MG(1), Yalcin R, Okyay K, Poyraz F, Bayraktar N, Pasaoglu H, Boyaci B,
Cengel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Erciyes University School of Medicine, 38039
Kayseri, Turkey. drmgkaya@yahoo.com

We investigated the prognostic importance of plasma myeloperoxidase levels in
patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) at long-term follow-up, 
and we analyzed the correlations between plasma myeloperoxidase levels and other 
biochemical values. We evaluated 73 consecutive patients (56 men; mean age, 56 ± 
11 yr) diagnosed with acute STEMI and 46 age- and sex-matched healthy control
participants. Patients were divided into 2 groups according to the median
myeloperoxidase level (Group 1: plasma myeloperoxidase ≤ 68 ng/mL; and Group 2:
plasma myeloperoxidase > 68 ng/mL). Patients were monitored for the occurrence of
major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), which were defined as cardiac death; 
reinfarction; new hospital admission for angina; heart failure; and
revascularization procedures. The mean follow-up period was 25 ± 16 months.
Plasma myeloperoxidase levels were higher in STEMI patients than in control
participants (82 ± 34 vs 20 ± 12 ng/mL; P = 0.001). Composite MACE occurred in 12
patients with high myeloperoxidase levels (33%) and in 4 patients with low
myeloperoxidase levels (11%) (P = 0.02). The incidences of nonfatal recurrent
myocardial infarction and verified cardiac death were higher in the
high-myeloperoxidase group. In multivariate analysis, high plasma myeloperoxidase
levels were independent predictors of MACE (odds ratio = 3.843; <95% confidence
interval, 1.625-6.563; P = 0.003). High plasma myeloperoxidase levels identify
patients with a worse prognosis after acute STEMI at 2-year follow-up. Evaluation
of plasma myeloperoxidase levels might be useful in determining patients at high 
risk of death and MACE who can benefit from further aggressive treatment and
closer follow-up.

PMCID: PMC3423276
PMID: 22949765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circulation. 2014 Sep 2;130(10):845-53. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.008653.
Epub 2014 Aug 5.

Temporal trends in patient characteristics and outcomes among Medicare
beneficiaries undergoing primary prevention implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator placement in the United States, 2006-2010. Results
from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry's Implantable
Cardioverter-Defibrillator Registry.

Borne RT(1), Peterson PN(2), Greenlee R(2), Heidenreich PA(2), Wang Y(2), Curtis 
JP(2), Tzou WS(2), Varosy PD(2), Kremers MS(2), Masoudi FA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO (R.T.B.,
P.N.P., W.S.T., P.D.V., F.A.M.); the Department of Medicine, Denver Health and
Hospital Authority, Denver, CO (P.N.P.); Colorado Cardiovascular Outcomes
Research (C-COR) Consortium, Denver, CO (P.N.P., P.D.V., F.A.M.); Marshfield
Clinic Research Foundation, Marshfield, WI (R.G.); VA Palo Alto Health Care
System, Palo Alto, Stanford University, Stanford, CA (P.A.H.); the Department of 
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT (Y.W.,
J.P.C.); VA Eastern Colorado Healthcare System, Denver, CO (P.D.V.); and Novant
Heart and Vascular Institute, Charlotte, NC (M.S.K.). ryan.borne@ucdenver.edu.
(2)From the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO (R.T.B.,
P.N.P., W.S.T., P.D.V., F.A.M.); the Department of Medicine, Denver Health and
Hospital Authority, Denver, CO (P.N.P.); Colorado Cardiovascular Outcomes
Research (C-COR) Consortium, Denver, CO (P.N.P., P.D.V., F.A.M.); Marshfield
Clinic Research Foundation, Marshfield, WI (R.G.); VA Palo Alto Health Care
System, Palo Alto, Stanford University, Stanford, CA (P.A.H.); the Department of 
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT (Y.W.,
J.P.C.); VA Eastern Colorado Healthcare System, Denver, CO (P.D.V.); and Novant
Heart and Vascular Institute, Charlotte, NC (M.S.K.).

Comment in
    Circulation. 2014 Sep 2;130(10):808-10.

BACKGROUND: Contemporary patterns of use and outcomes of implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) in community practice settings are not well
characterized. We assessed temporal trends in patient characteristics and
outcomes among older patients undergoing primary prevention ICD therapy in US
hospitals between 2006 and 2010.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using the National Cardiovascular Data Registry's ICD
Registry, we identified Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries aged ≥65 years and
older with left ventricular ejection fraction ≤35% who underwent primary
prevention ICD implantation, including those receiving concomitant cardiac
resynchronization therapy between 2006 and 2010 and could be matched to Medicare 
claims. Outcomes were mortality and hospitalization (all-cause and heart failure)
at 180 days, and device-related complications. We used multivariable hierarchical
logistic regression to assess temporal trends in outcomes accounting for changes 
in patient, physician, and hospital characteristics. The cohort included 117 100 
patients. Between 2006 and 2010, only modest changes in patient characteristics
were noted. Fewer single lead devices and more cardiac resynchronization therapy 
devices were used over time. Between 2006 and 2010, there were significant
improvements in all outcomes, including 6-month all cause mortality (7.1% in
2006, 6.5% 2010; adjusted odds ratio, 0.88; 95% confidence interval, 0.82-0.95), 
6-month rehospitalization (36.3% in 2006, 33.7% in 2010; adjusted odds ratio,
0.87; 95% confidence interval, 0.83-0.91), and device-related complications (5.8%
in 2006, 4.8% in 2010; adjusted odds ratio, 0.80; 95% confidence interval,
0.74-0.88).
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical characteristics of this national population of Medicare
patients undergoing primary prevention ICD implantation were stable between 2006 
and 2010. Simultaneous improvements in outcomes suggest meaningful advances in
the care for this patient population.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25095884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2001 Jun 15;87(12):1367-71.

Socioeconomic status as an independent risk factor for hospital readmission for
heart failure.

Philbin EF(1), Dec GW, Jenkins PL, DiSalvo TG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Albany Medical College, Albany, New York 12208, USA.
PhilbiE@mail.amc.edu

The management of heart failure is characterized by high rates of hospital
admission as well as rehospitalization after inpatient treatment of this
disorder, whereas skillful medical care may reduce the risk of hospital
admission. The purpose of this study was to examine the relation between income
(as a measure of socioeconomic status) and the frequency of hospital readmission 
among a large and diverse group of persons treated for heart failure. We analyzed
administrative discharge data from 236 nonfederal acute-care hospitals in New
York State, involving 41,776 African-American or Caucasian hospital survivors
with International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical
Modification codes for heart failure in the principal diagnosis position between 
January 1 and December 31, 1995. Household income was derived from postal ZIP
codes and census data. We found that patients residing in lower income
neighborhoods were more often women or African-Americans, had more comorbid
illness, had higher use of Medicaid insurance, and were more often admitted to
rural hospitals. There was a stepwise decrease in the crude frequency of
readmission from the lowest quartile of income (23.2%) to the highest (20.0%) (p 
<0.0001 for Mantel-Haenszel chi-square test for trend across all quartiles; p
<0.0001 for comparison between quartiles 1 and 4). After adjustment for baseline 
differences and process of care, income remained a significant predictor, with an
increase in the risk of readmission noted in association with lower levels of
income (adjusted odds ratio for quartile 1:4 comparison, 1.18; 95% confidence
interval, 1.10 to 1.26, p <0.0001). We conclude that lower income patients
hospitalized for treatment of heart failure in New York differ from higher income
patients in important clinical and demographic comparisons. Even after adjustment
for these fundamental differences and other potential confounding factors, lower 
income is a positive predictor of readmission risk.

PMID: 11397355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Jan;102(1):1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.acvd.2008.10.017. Epub
2009 Jan 29.

Integrated approach to the management of heart failure: role of outpatient
programmes.

Trochu JN.

Comment on
    Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Jan;102(1):29-41.

PMID: 19233103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Medsurg Nurs. 2007 Oct;16(5):317-21.

Sociodemographic variables predicting poor post-discharge outcomes for
hospitalized elders with heart failure.

Roe-Prior P(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Scranton, Department of Nursing, Scranton, PA, USA.

Elders with heart failure are at high risk for poor postdischarge outcomes such
as rehospitalizations, emergency department use, and unscheduled physician
visits. This study was conducted to determine if sociodemographic characteristics
would aid in identifying high-risk individuals.

PMID: 18072670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Cardiol. 1999 Dec;22(12):791-4.

Racial differences in patients with heart failure.

Afzal A(1), Ananthasubramaniam K, Sharma N, al-Malki Q, Ali AS, Jacobsen G, Jafri
SM.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Ford Heart and Vascular Institute, Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA.

BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESIS: Limited data exist regarding racial differences in
heart failure. The objective of this prospective study was to document racial
differences in the baseline demographics and patterns of health care utilization 
and outcomes in patients with heart failure.
METHODS: The data on 163 consecutive patients (113 black, 50 white) admitted with
a diagnosis of heart failure confirmed by pulmonary congestion on chest x-ray
were prospectively evaluated. Patient demographics, physical examination findings
at admission, comorbid conditions, and medications at admission and discharge
were analyzed. Follow-up was performed to document visits to the physician's
office after discharge and readmission rate during a 6-month time period.
RESULTS: Compared with whites, blacks were younger in age (mean age 63.8 +/- 13.7
years vs. 70.8 +/- 13.1, p = 0.003), and had a higher prevalence of hypertension 
(86 vs. 66%, p = 0.004), left ventricular hypertrophy (24 vs. 8%, p = 0.02),
ejection fraction < 40% (64 vs. 43%, p = 0.03), and readmission rate (33 vs. 18%,
p = 0.05). Whites had a higher prevalence of atrial fibrillation (42 vs. 21%, p =
0.006) and more frequently followed up with their cardiologists as outpatients
(58 vs. 39%, p = 0.04).
CONCLUSION: Significant racial differences exist in patients with heart failure
with regard to age, incidence, etiologic factors, left ventricular hypertrophy,
left ventricular function, and clinical follow-up. It is important to consider
these racial differences in the evaluation and management of patients with heart 
failure.

PMID: 10626081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Jan;102(1):29-41. doi: 10.1016/j.acvd.2008.10.013. Epub
2009 Feb 10.

RESICARD: East Paris network for the management of heart failure: absence of
effect on mortality and rehospitalization in patients with severe heart failure
admitted following severe decompensation.

Assyag P(1), Renaud T, Cohen-Solal A, Viaud M, Krys H, Bundalo A, Michel PL,
Boukobza R, Bourgueil Y, Cohen A.

Author information: 
(1)IRDES, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Jan;102(1):1-3.

BACKGROUND: Heart failure presents a major public health problem due to its high 
prevalence and the increasing number of hospital admissions for this condition. A
coordinated healthcare network involving general practitioners and cardiologists 
was set up in the east of Paris in an effort to improve the management and
outcomes of patients with severe heart failure.
AIMS: To reinforce patient education, improve compliance with medications and
identify symptoms requiring treatment modification.
METHODS: In this 'before and after' study, the control group comprised patients
hospitalized for severe heart failure who received conventional management in the
year preceding the network set-up. The comparative group consisted of patients
hospitalized for severe heart failure who underwent network-led care.
RESULTS: No significant differences were found between rates of first
rehospitalization and all-cause mortality at 1 year between control and network
groups, or between rates of first hospitalization due to cardiac causes, time to 
the first event, duration of hospitalization, rates of cardiac death or time to
death.
CONCLUSIONS: In this non-randomized study, we found no benefit from management
according to the RESICARD healthcare network in terms of mortality or
hospitalization in patients with severe chronic heart failure.

PMID: 19233107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Arch Intern Med. 1998 May 25;158(10):1067-72.

Effects of a home-based intervention among patients with congestive heart failure
discharged from acute hospital care.

Stewart S(1), Pearson S, Horowitz JD.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Unit of the Queen Elizabeth Hospital/University of Adelaide,
Woodville, South Australia.

BACKGROUND: We examined the effect of a home-based intervention (HBI) on
readmission and death among "high-risk" patients with congestive heart failure
discharged home from acute hospital care.
METHODS: Hospitalized patients with congestive heart failure and impaired
systolic function, intolerance to exercise, and a history of 1 or more hospital
admissions for acute heart failure were randomized to either usual care (n=48) or
HBI at 1 week after discharge (n=49). Home-based intervention comprised a single 
home visit (by a nurse and pharmacist) to optimize medication management,
identify early clinical deterioration, and intensify medical follow-up and
caregiver vigilance as appropriate. The primary end point of the study was
frequency of unplanned readmissions plus out-of-hospital deaths within 6 months
of discharge. Secondary end points included duration of hospital stay and overall
mortality.
RESULTS: During follow-up, patients in the HBI group had fewer unplanned
readmissions (36 vs 63; P=.03) and fewer out-of-hospital deaths (1 vs 5; P=.11): 
0.8+/-0.9 vs 1.4+/-1.8 (mean +/- SD) events per patient assigned to HBI and usual
care, respectively (P=.03). Patients in the HBI group also had fewer days of
hospitalization (261 vs 452; P=.05) and fewer total deaths (6 vs 12; P=.11).
Patients assigned to usual care were more likely to experience 3 or more
readmissions for acute heart failure (P=.02). Predictors of unplanned readmission
were (1) 14 days or more of unplanned readmission during the 6 months before
study entry (odds ratio [OR], 5.2; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.8-16.2), (2)
previous admission for acute myocardial ischemia (OR, 3.3; 95% CI, 1.2-9.1), and 
(3) an albumin plasma concentration of 38 g/L or less (OR, 2.4; 95% CI, 1.2-6.0).
Home-based intervention was also associated with a trend toward reduced risk of
unplanned readmission (OR, 0.4; 95% CI, 0.2-1.1).
CONCLUSION: Among a cohort of high-risk patients with congestive heart failure,
HBI was associated with reduced frequency of unplanned readmissions plus
out-of-hospital deaths within 6 months of discharge from the hospital.

PMID: 9605777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2013 Jan 1;111(1):79-84. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.08.050. Epub
2012 Oct 2.

Development of a method to risk stratify patients with heart failure for 30-day
readmission using implantable device diagnostics.

Whellan DJ(1), Sarkar S, Koehler J, Small RS, Boyle A, Warman EN, Abraham WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
david.whellan@jefferson.edu

The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether diagnostic data collected
after a heart failure (HF) hospitalization can identify patients with HF at risk 
of early readmission. The diagnostic data from cardiac resynchronization therapy 
defibrillator (CRT-D) devices can identify outpatient HF patients at risk of
future HF events. In the present retrospective analysis of 4 studies, we
identified patients with CRT-D devices, with a HF admission, and 30-day
postdischarge follow-up data. The evaluation of the diagnostic data for
impedance, atrial fibrillation, ventricular heart rate during atrial
fibrillation, loss of CRT-D pacing, night heart rate, and heart rate variability 
was modeled to simulate a review of the first 7 days after discharge on the
seventh day. Using a combined score created from the device parameters that were 
significant univariate predictors of 30-day HF readmission, 3 risk groups were
created. A Cox proportional hazards model adjusting for age, gender, New York
Heart Association class, and length of stay during the index hospitalization was 
used to compare the groups. The study cohort of 166 patients experienced a total 
of 254 HF hospitalizations, with 34 readmissions within 30 days. Daily impedance,
high atrial fibrillation burden with poor rate control (>90 beat/min) or reduced 
CRT-D pacing (<90% pacing), and night heart rate >80 beats/min were significant
univariate predictors of 30-day HF readmission. Patients in the "high"-risk group
for the combined diagnostic had a significantly greater risk (hazard ratio 25.4, 
95% confidence interval 3.6 to 179.0, p = 0.001) compared to the "low"-risk group
for 30-day readmission for HF. In conclusion, device-derived HF diagnostic
criteria evaluated 7 days after discharge identified patients at significantly
greater risk of a HF event within 30 days after discharge.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23040596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013 Jan 29;61(4):391-403. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.09.038.
Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Rehospitalization for heart failure: problems and perspectives.

Gheorghiade M(1), Vaduganathan M, Fonarow GC, Bonow RO.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Innovation at Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. m-gheorghiade@northwestern.edu

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013 Jul 9;62(2):166-7.
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013 Jul 9;62(2):165-6.

With a prevalence of 5.8 million in the United States alone, heart failure (HF)
is associated with high morbidity, mortality, and healthcare expenditures. Close 
to 1 million hospitalizations for heart failure (HHF) occur annually, accounting 
for over 6.5 million hospital days and a substantial portion of the estimated
$37.2 billion that is spent each year on HF in the United States. Although some
progress has been made in reducing mortality in patients hospitalized with HF,
rates of rehospitalization continue to rise, and approach 30% within 60 to 90
days of discharge. Approximately half of HHF patients have preserved or
relatively preserved ejection fraction (EF). Their post-discharge event rate is
similar to those with reduced EF. HF readmission is increasingly being used as a 
quality metric, a basis for hospital reimbursement, and an outcome measure in HF 
clinical trials. In order to effectively prevent HF readmissions and improve
overall outcomes, it is important to have a complete and longitudinal
characterization of HHF patients. This paper highlights management strategies
that when properly implemented may help reduce HF rehospitalizations and include 
adopting a mechanistic approach to cardiac abnormalities, treating noncardiac
comorbidities, increasing utilization of evidence-based therapies, and improving 
care transitions, monitoring, and disease management.

Copyright © 2013 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23219302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2005 Apr 15;95(8):955-9.

Effect of gender on treatment, resource utilization, and outcomes in congestive
heart failure in Quebec, Canada.

Sheppard R(1), Behlouli H, Richard H, Pilote L.

Author information: 
(1)Sir Mortimer B. Davis/Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

This study assessed whether a gender gap exists in therapy, procedure use, and
outcomes in patients who have a new diagnosis of congestive heart failure (CHF)
at the population level. The Quebec hospital discharge database was linked with
the physician and drug claims databases to identify a cohort of patients who had 
a diagnosis of CHF (code 428 in the International Classification of Diseases,
Ninth Revision) between January 1998 and December 2002. There were 16,017 men and
16,622 women. Women who had CHF were older (78 +/- 11 vs 73 +/- 11 years, p
<0.001), had more hypertension (41% vs 28%, p <0.001) and hyperlipidemia (18% vs 
14%, p <0.001) but less frequent myocardial infarction (19% vs 25%, p <0.001).
Women were less likely to see a cardiologist (30% vs 34%, p <0.001) and required 
a longer hospital stay (12.0 +/- 14.8 vs 10.6 +/- 13.3 days, p <0.001). During
the first year after a first CHF hospitalization, women were less like to have an
assessment of left ventricular function (61% vs 65%, p <0.001), diagnostic
cardiac catheterization (11% vs 15%, p <0.001), and revascularization procedure
(4% vs 6%, p <0.001). Women were less likely to be prescribed an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (60% vs 66%) and more likely to be
prescribed a beta blocker (38% vs 34%). Women and men had similar yearly numbers 
of rehospitalizations for CHF (1.4 +/- 1.0 vs 1.5 +/- 1.0) and emergency room
visits (1.7 +/- 1.2 vs 1.8 +/- 1.3). The adjusted risk of death was minimally
higher in men than in women (hazard ratio 1.06, 95% confidence interval 1.03 to
1.1, p <0.01). Thus, despite less frequent cardiologist assessment, fewer
cardiac-related procedures, and less frequent use of standard medical therapy,
clinical outcomes in women and men who had CHF were similar.

PMID: 15820161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2003 Dec 15;92(12):1442-4.

Prognostic significance of an elevated creatine kinase in the absence of an
elevated troponin I during an acute coronary syndrome.

Yee KC(1), Mukherjee D, Smith DE, Kline-Rogers EM, Fang J, Mehta RH, Almanaseer
Y, Akhras E, Cooper JV, Eagle KA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan Health Systems, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

In patients with troponin-negative acute coronary syndromes, creatine kinase
(CK)-MB elevation predicts a significantly higher risk of death and major acute
cardiac events compared with CK-MB negative patients. This risk is accentuated in
troponin-negative, CK-MB positive patients who do not demonstrate ST elevation by
electrocardiogram.

PMID: 14675582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2014 May-Jun;29(3):232-41. doi: 10.1097/JCN.0b013e31828f0d25.

Discharge clinical characteristics and 60-day readmission in patients
hospitalized with heart failure.

Anderson KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kelley M. Anderson, PhD, RN, FNP Assistant Professor and Assistant Director,
Family Nurse Practitioner Program, On-campus, School of Nursing and Health
Studies, Georgetown University, and Nurse Practitioner, Division of Cardiology,
Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, DC.

BACKGROUND: Heart failure is a clinical syndrome that incurs a high prevalence,
mortality, morbidity, and economic burden in our society. Patients with heart
failure may experience hospitalization because of an acute exacerbation of their 
condition. Recurrent hospitalizations soon after discharge are an unfortunate
occurrence in this patient population.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to explore the clinical and diagnostic
characteristics of individuals hospitalized with a primary diagnosis of heart
failure at the time of discharge and to compare the association of these
indicators in individuals who did and did not experience a heart failure
hospitalization within 60 days of the index stay.
METHODS: The study is a descriptive, correlational, quantitative study using a
retrospective review of 134 individuals discharged with a primary diagnosis of
heart failure. Records were reviewed for sociodemographic characteristics, health
histories, clinical assessment findings, and diagnostic information.
RESULTS: Significant predictors of 60-day heart failure readmissions were dyspnea
(β = 0.579), crackles (β = 1.688), and assistance with activities of daily living
(β = 2.328), independent of age, gender, and multiple other factors. By using
hierarchical logistical regression, a model was derived that demonstrated the
ability to correctly classify 77.4% of the cohort, 78.2% of those who did have a 
readmission (sensitivity of the prediction), and 76.7% of the subjects in whom
the predicted event, readmission, did not occur (specificity of the prediction).
CONCLUSION: Hospitalizations for heart failure are markers of clinical
instability. Future events after hospitalization are common in this patient
population, and this study provides a novel understanding of clinical
characteristics at the time of discharge that are associated with future
outcomes, specifically 60-day heart failure readmissions. A consideration of
these characteristics provides an additional perspective to guide clinical
decision making and the evaluation of discharge readiness.

PMID: 23612038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2011 May;64(5):365-72. doi: 10.1016/j.recesp.2010.10.017. Epub
2011 Mar 11.

[Comparative prognostic value of plasma and urinary N-terminal pro-B-type
natriuretic peptide in patients with acute destabilized heart failure].

[Article in Spanish]

Manzano-Fernández S(1), Januzzi JL, Boronat García M, Bonaque-González JC,
Muñoz-Esparza C, Albaladejo-Otón MD, Pastor-Pérez FJ, Pastor P, Valdés M,
Pascual-Figal DA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cardiología, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca,
Murcia, España. sergiosmf13@hotmail.com

Comment in
    Rev Esp Cardiol. 2011 May;64(5):355-7.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Urinary concentrations of amino-terminal pro-B type 
natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) may be prognostically meaningful; however, direct
comparison to plasma concentrations of this marker have not been performed in
patients with acutely decompensated heart failure (ADHF). The aims of this study 
were to compare the prognostic value of plasma versus urinary NT-proBNP
concentration for the risk stratification of patients with ADHF.
METHODS: Consecutive hospitalized patients with ADHF were prospectively studied. 
Blood and urine samples were simultaneously collected on hospital arrival to
determine NT-proBNP concentrations. Clinical follow-up was obtained, and the
occurrence of mortality and heart failure hospitalization was registered.
RESULTS: The study included 138 patients (median, 74 years [interquartile range, 
67-80]; 54% men). During a median follow-up period of 387 days [interquartile
range, 161-559], 65 patients (47%) suffered adverse clinical events. Plasma
NT-proBNP concentration was higher among patients who presented adverse events
(4561 pg/mL [2191-8631] vs 2906 pg/mL [1643-5823]; P=.03), whereas urinary
NT-proBNP was similar in both groups (P=.62). After multivariable Cox regression 
analyses, plasma NT-proBNP concentration was associated with a higher risk of
adverse events, whether considered continuously (per 100 pg/mL; hazard ratio
[HR]=1.004; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.001-1.007; P=.003) or categorically
(≥3345 pg/mL; HR=2.35; 95%CI, 1.41-3.93; P=.001). In contrast, urinary NT-proBNP 
concentration was not associated with adverse outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma NT-proBNP concentration is superior to urinary NT-proBNP
concentration for the prediction of adverse clinical outcomes among unselected
patients with ADHF.

Copyright © 2010 Sociedad Española de Cardiología. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21397374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circulation. 2003 Jul 15;108(2):184-91. Epub 2003 Jun 23.

Care and outcomes of patients newly hospitalized for heart failure in the
community treated by cardiologists compared with other specialists.

Jong P(1), Gong Y, Liu PP, Austin PC, Lee DS, Tu JV.

Author information: 
(1)Heart & Stroke/Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence, Toronto General Hospital,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2003 Jul 15;108(2):129-31.

BACKGROUND: It is not known whether subspecialty care by cardiologists improves
outcomes in heart failure patients from the community over care by other
physicians.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using administrative data, we monitored 38 702 consecutive
patients with first-time hospitalization for heart failure in Ontario, Canada,
between April 1994 and March 1996 and examined differences in processes of care
and clinical outcomes between patients attended by physicians of different
disciplines. We found that patients attended by cardiologists had lower 1-year
risk-adjusted mortality than those attended by general internists, family
practitioners, and other physicians (28.5% versus 31.7%, 34.9%, and 35.9%,
respectively; all pairwise comparisons, P<0.001). The 1-year risk-adjusted
composite outcome of death and readmission for heart failure was also lower for
the cardiologists compared with family practitioners and other physicians but not
general internists (54.7% versus 58.1%, 58.3%, and 55.4%; P<0.001, P<0.001, and
P=0.39, respectively). Multivariable hierarchical modeling demonstrated a
significant physician-level effect for both outcomes in favor of the
cardiologists, particularly against non-general internists. Cardiologist care was
associated with higher adjusted rates of invasive interventions and postdischarge
prescriptions of heart failure medications.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population-based cohort, heart failure patients attended by 
cardiologists in hospital had lower risk of death as well as the composite risk
of death or readmission than patients attended by noncardiologists. These data
raise the need to identify specialty-driven differences in processes of care for 
heart failure patients, which may explain the observed disparity in clinical
outcomes that presently favor cardiologist care.

PMID: 12821540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2007 Aug 15;100(4):690-6. Epub 2007 Jun 26.

Comparative effectiveness of beta-adrenergic antagonists (atenolol, metoprolol
tartrate, carvedilol) on the risk of rehospitalization in adults with heart
failure.

Go AS(1), Yang J, Gurwitz JH, Hsu J, Lane K, Platt R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente of Northern California, Oakland,
California, USA. alan.s.go@kp.org

Placebo-controlled randomized trials have demonstrated the efficacy of selected
beta blockers on outcomes in chronic heart failure (HF), but the relative
effectiveness of different beta blockers in usual clinical care is poorly
understood. We compared 12-month risk of rehospitalization for HF associated with
receipt of different beta blockers in 7,883 adults hospitalized for HF within 2
large health plans between January 1, 2001 and December 31, 2002. Beta-blocker
use was ascertained from electronic pharmacy databases and readmissions within 12
months were identified from hospital discharge databases. Extended Cox regression
was used to examine the association between receipt of different beta blockers
and risk of readmission for HF after adjustment for potential confounders. During
follow-up, there were 3,234 person-years of exposure to beta blockers (39.3%
atenolol, 42.0% metoprolol tartrate, 12.3% carvedilol, and 6.4% other). Crude
12-month rates of readmissions for HF were high overall (42.6 per 100
person-years). After adjustment for potential confounders, cumulative exposure to
each beta blocker, and propensity to receive carvedilol compared with atenolol,
adjusted risks of readmission were not significantly different for metoprolol
tartrate (adjusted hazard ratio 0.95, 95% confidence interval 0.85 to 1.05) or
for carvedilol (adjusted hazard ratio 0.92, 95% confidence interval 0.74 to
1.14). In conclusion, in a contemporary cohort of high-risk patients hospitalized
with HF, we found that adjusted risks of rehospitalization for HF within 12
months were not significantly different in patients receiving atenolol,
shorter-acting metoprolol tartrate, or carvedilol.

PMID: 17697830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Apr 15;57(3):516-23.

Risk of congestive heart failure with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and
selective Cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitors: a class effect?

Hudson M(1), Rahme E, Richard H, Pilote L.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. marie.hudson@mcgill.ca

OBJECTIVE: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as a class have been
shown to increase the risk of congestive heart failure (CHF) compared with
celecoxib. The magnitude of the risk for individual NSAIDs is not known.
METHODS: Using administrative databases, we performed a nested case-control study
in a population-based cohort of patients ages >or=66 years admitted for CHF
between January 1998 and March 2003. Cases were patients readmitted for CHF after
cohort entry (index date). Four controls were matched to each case on date of
cohort entry and time between cohort entry and index date. Exposure was the
current use of an NSAID or a coxib in the 7 days prior to CHF readmission. Using 
conditional logistic regression, we calculated the odds of readmission for CHF in
patients exposed to naproxen, diclofenac, ibuprofen, indomethacin, or rofecoxib
compared with celecoxib, after adjusting for possible confounding variables.
RESULTS: We identified 8,512 cases and 34,048 controls. The baseline
characteristics between the groups were similar in general. The odds of being
readmitted for CHF were higher in patients currently exposed to indomethacin
(odds ratio [OR] 2.04, 95% confidence interval [95% CI] 1.16-3.58) or rofecoxib
(OR 1.58, 95% CI 1.19-2.11) compared with celecoxib. There was no difference
between naproxen, diclofenac, and ibuprofen compared with celecoxib, although the
numbers of exposed cases and controls were small.
CONCLUSION: In elderly patients with known CHF, indomethacin and rofecoxib are
associated with a greater risk of recurrent CHF compared with celecoxib.
Alternatives should be considered for patients with CHF who require
antiinflammatory drugs.

PMID: 17394181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1990 Dec;38(12):1290-5.

Early readmission of elderly patients with congestive heart failure.

Vinson JM(1), Rich MW, Sperry JC, Shah AS, McNamara T.

Author information: 
(1)Jewish Hospital, Washington University Medical Center, St. Louis, MO 63110.

Comment in
    J Am Geriatr Soc. 1991 Oct;39(10):1045-6.

Repetitive hospitalizations are a major health problem in elderly patients with
chronic disease, accounting for up to one fourth of all inpatient Medicare
expenditures. Congestive heart failure, one of the most common indications for
hospitalization in the elderly, is also associated with a high incidence of early
rehospitalization, but variables identifying patients at increased risk and an
analysis of potentially remediable factors contributing to readmission have not
previously been reported. We prospectively evaluated 161 patients 70 years or
older that had been hospitalized with documented congestive heart failure.
Hospital mortality was 13% (n = 21). Among patients discharged alive, 66 (47%)
were readmitted within 90 days. Recurrent heart failure was the most common cause
for readmission, occurring in 38 patients (57%). Other cardiac disorders
accounted for five readmissions (8%), and noncardiac illness led to readmission
in 21 cases (32%). Factors predictive of an increased probability of readmission 
included a prior history of heart failure, four or more admissions within the
preceding 8 years, and heart failure precipitated by an acute myocardial
infarction or uncontrolled hypertension (all P less than .05). Using subjective
criteria, 25 first readmissions (38%) were judged possibly preventable, and 10
(15%) were judged probably preventable. Factors contributing to preventable
readmissions included noncompliance with medications (15%) or diet (18%),
inadequate discharge planning (15%) or follow-up (20%), failed social support
system (21%), and failure to seek medical attention promptly when symptoms
recurred (20%). Thus, early rehospitalization in elderly patients with congestive
heart failure may be preventable in up to 50% of cases, identification of high
risk patients is possible shortly after admission, and further study of
nonpharmacologic interventions designed to reduce readmission frequency is
justified.

PMID: 2254567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. West J Nurs Res. 2004 Aug;26(5):533-46.

Variables predictive of poor postdischarge outcomes for hospitalized elders in
heart failure.

Roe-Prior P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, University of Scranton, Pennsylvania, USA.

Heart failure (HF) affects more than one million older Americans. As the
population ages, the incidence of HF will increase. The purpose of this study was
to identify variables that profile elders hospitalized with HF who are at high
risk for poor postdischarge outcomes. A total of 103 patients were enrolled in
the study. A low serum sodium and a fair or poor self-reported health status
predicted all-cause readmission. A low serum sodium predicted HF-related
readmissions. Four or more HF symptoms and index admission to an urban hospital
predicted physician office visits. Admission to a community hospital predicted
emergency department visits, and the number of coexisting medical conditions
indicated an increased risk for an emergency department visit. The findings
indicate that it is possible to profile hospitalized elders with HF who are at
risk for poor postdischarge outcomes.

PMID: 15359056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Can J Cardiol. 2010 Apr;26(4):203-7.

Long-term influence of mild or moderate ischemic mitral regurgitation after
off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery.

Hong JM(1), Cartier R, Pellerin M, Demers P, Bouchard D, Couture P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Chungbuk National
University, Cheongju, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: The issue of mild to moderate ischemic mitral regurgitation (IMR) is 
controversial after conventional surgery, and has not been specifically studied
after off-pump coronary artery bypass graft (OPCAB) surgery.
OBJECTIVE: To review the influence of mild or moderate IMR on longterm survival
and recurrent cardiac events after OPCAB surgery.
METHODS: A total of 1000 consecutive and systematic OPCAB patients who underwent 
operations between September 1996 and March 2004 were prospectively followed.
Sixty-seven patients (6.7%) had mild to moderate IMR at the time of surgery.
Operative mortality, actuarial survival and major adverse cardiac event-free
survival were studied to assess the effect of IMR.
RESULTS: The mean (+/- SD) follow-up period was 66+/-22 months and was completed 
in 97% of the cohort. IMR patients were older (P<0.001), and had lower ejection
fractions (P<0.001) and more comorbidities. More female patients presented with
IMR (P=0.002). Operative mortality (P=0.25) and prevalence of perioperative
myocardial infarction (P=0.25) were comparable for both groups. Eight-year
survival was decreased in IMR patients (P<0.001), but after adjusting for risk
factors in the Cox regression model, mild to moderate IMR was not found to be a
significant risk factor of long-term mortality (P=0.42). Major adverse cardiac
event-free survival at eight years was significantly lower in IMR patients
(P<0.001) and, more specifically, in patients with 2+ IMR. After adjusting for
risk factors, IMR remained a significant cause of poor outcome (hazard ratio
2.09), especially for recurrent congestive heart failure and myocardial
infarction.
CONCLUSIONS: OPCAB patients with preoperative mild or moderate IMR had a higher
prevalence of preoperative risk factors than those without IMR. They had
comparable perioperative mortality and morbidity but, over the long term, were
found to be at risk for recurrent cardiac events.

PMCID: PMC2886544
PMID: 20386769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Apr 15;63(14):1395-404. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.12.020. 
Epub 2014 Jan 30.

Trends in the use and outcomes of ventricular assist devices among medicare
beneficiaries, 2006 through 2011.

Khazanie P(1), Hammill BG(2), Patel CB(1), Eapen ZJ(1), Peterson ED(1), Rogers
JG(1), Milano CA(1), Curtis LH(1), Hernandez AF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, 
North Carolina; Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, North Carolina. (2)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University
School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina. (3)Duke Clinical Research Institute, 
Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina; Department of
Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina. Electronic 
address: adrian.hernandez@duke.edu.

OBJECTIVES: This study sought to examine trends in mortality, readmission, and
costs among Medicare beneficiaries receiving ventricular assist devices (VADs)
and associations between hospital-level procedure volume and outcomes.
BACKGROUND: VADs are an option for patients with advanced heart failure, but
temporal changes in outcomes and associations between facility-level volume and
outcomes are poorly understood.
METHODS: This is a population-based, retrospective cohort study of all
fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries with heart failure who received an
implantable VAD between 2006 and 2011. We used Cox proportional hazards models to
examine temporal changes in mortality, readmission, and hospital-level procedure 
volume.
RESULTS: Among 2,507 patients who received a VAD at 103 centers during the study 
period, the in-hospital mortality decreased from 30% to 10% (p < 0.001), the
1-year mortality decreased from 42% to 26% (p < 0.001), and the all-cause
readmission was frequent (82% and 81%; p = 0.70). After covariate adjustment,
in-hospital and 1-year mortality decreased (p < 0.001 for both), but the
all-cause readmission did not change (p = 0.82). Hospitals with a low procedure
volume had higher risks of in-hospital mortality (risk ratio: 1.72; 95%
confidence interval [CI]: 1.28 to 2.33) and 1-year mortality (risk ratio: 1.55;
95% CI: 1.24 to 1.93) than high-volume hospitals. Procedure volume was not
associated with risk of readmission. The greatest cost was from the index
hospitalization and remained unchanged ($204,020 in 2006 and $201,026 in 2011; p 
= 0.21).
CONCLUSIONS: Short- and long-term mortality after VAD implantation among Medicare
beneficiaries improved, but readmission remained similar over time. A higher
volume of VAD implants was associated with lower risk of mortality but not
readmission. Costs to Medicare have not changed in recent years.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4203698
PMID: 24486278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Scand Cardiovasc J. 2014 Aug;48(4):209-15. doi: 10.3109/14017431.2014.917767.
Epub 2014 May 28.

High osteoprotegerin levels predict MACCE in STEMI patients, but are not
associated with myocardial salvage.

Bjerre M(1), Munk K, Sloth AD, Nielsen SS, Flyvbjerg A, Bøtker HE.

Author information: 
(1)The Medical Research Laboratory, Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of
Health, Aarhus University , Aarhus C , Denmark.

OBJECTIVES: High circulating levels of osteoprotegerin (OPG) carry prognostic
impact in cohorts with various cardiovascular diagnoses. With the present study, 
we aim to investigate the role of OPG within the scale of myocardial damage.
DESIGN: This study includes 219 consecutive patients with acute ST-elevation
myocardial infarction randomized to primary percutaneous coronary intervention
(pPCI) or pPCI and remote ischemic per-conditioning. Salvage index via myocardial
single-photon emission CT assessment (data available in 61% of the patients) was 
performed, and derived from Day 1 (myocardial area at risk) and Day 30 (final
infarct size). Plasma OPG levels were measured using an in-house immunoassay. A
combined end-point of all-mortality, myocardial infarction, stroke, readmission
for heart failure and ischemic stroke/transient ischemic attack (Major Adverse
Cardiac and Cerebrovascular Events [MACCE]) was used for follow-up; 45 (38-48
months).
RESULTS: High OPG levels were associated with the severity of cardiovascular
disease. During follow-up, OPG was a predictor of MACCE (unadjusted, HR: 2.1, 95%
CI: 1.14-3.85, P = 0.017). Adjustments for age, gender, and body mass index
preserved the independent predictive power of OPG. However, OPG levels were
neither associated with salvage index nor with the final infarct size. Remote
ischemic per-conditioning had no effect on OPG levels.
CONCLUSION: Despite absent association between OPG levels and the scale of
myocardial damage, high OPG levels predict a significantly increased risk of
MACCE.

PMID: 24758546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Cardiol. 2011 Nov;34(11):682-8. doi: 10.1002/clc.20986. Epub 2011 Nov 6.

Pharmacologic prophylaxis for venous thromboembolism and 30-day outcomes among
older patients hospitalized with heart failure: an analysis from the ADHERE
national registry linked to Medicare claims.

Kociol RD(1), Hammill BG, Hernandez AF, Klaskala W, Mills RM, Curtis LH, Fonarow 
GC.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Department of Medicine, Duke University
School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA. rkociol@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

BACKGROUND: Hospitalized medically ill patients are at greater risk for venous
thromboembolism (VTE). Although pharmacologic prophylaxis regimens have reduced
VTE risk in medically ill patients, associations with early postdischarge adverse
clinical outcomes among patients with heart failure are unknown.
HYPOTHESIS: We hypothesized that patients receiving pharmacologic VTE prophylaxis
during hospitalization for heart failure would have lower rates of postdischarge 
adverse clinical outcomes than patients not receiving prophylaxis.
METHODS: Using data from the Acute Decompensated Heart Failure (ADHERE) registry 
linked to Medicare claims, we estimated 30-day postdischarge outcome rates for
patients who received in-hospital subcutaneous heparin compared with patients who
did not receive in-hospital VTE prophylaxis. We excluded patients who received
warfarin or intravenous heparin. Outcomes included mortality, thromboembolic
events, major adverse cardiovascular events, and all-cause readmission. We used
propensity-score methods to estimate associations between VTE prophylaxis and
each outcome. In a secondary analysis, we compared outcomes of patients receiving
pharmacologic prophylaxis with unfractionated heparin (UFH) vs
low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH).
RESULTS: Of 36 799 eligible patients in 265 hospitals, 12 169 (33%) received
pharmacologic VTE prophylaxis during the hospitalization. In unadjusted analysis 
and after weighting by the inverse probability of treatment, VTE prophylaxis was 
not associated with 30-day postdischarge mortality, thromboembolic events, major 
adverse cardiovascular events, or all-cause readmission. There were no
differences in outcomes between patients receiving UFH and those receiving LMWH.
CONCLUSIONS: Pharmacologic VTE prophylaxis is provided to one-third of older
patients hospitalized with heart failure. Treatment with LMWH or UFH did not have
a statistically significant association with 30-day postdischarge outcomes.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22057910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Vasc Surg. 2013 Mar;57(3):784-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2012.09.035. Epub 2013 Jan
9.

Factors predicting resource utilization and survival after major amputation.

Henry AJ(1), Hevelone ND, Hawkins AT, Watkins MT, Belkin M, Nguyen LL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Center for Surgery and Public
Health, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Major amputation is associated with increased short-term healthcare
resource utilization (RU), early mortality, and socioeconomic status (SES)
disparities. Our objective is to study patient-specific and SES-related
predictors of long-term RU and survival after amputation.
METHODS: This retrospective analysis identified 364 adult patients who underwent 
index major amputation for critical limb ischemia from January 1995 through
December 2000 at two tertiary centers with outcomes through December 2010. Age,
gender, SES (race, income, insurance, and marital status), comorbidities
(congestive heart failure [CHF], diabetes, diabetes with complications, and renal
failure [RF]), subsequent procedures, cumulative length of stay (cLOS), and
mortality were analyzed. Bivariate and multivariate Poisson regression for
subsequent procedures and cLOS and Cox proportional hazard modeling for all-cause
mortality were undertaken.
RESULTS: During a mean follow-up of 3.25 years, amputation patients had mean cLOS
of 71.2 days per person-year (median, 17.6), 19.5 readmissions per person-year
(median, 2.1), 0.57 amputation-related procedures (median, 0), and 0.31
cardiovascular procedures (median, 0). Below-knee amputation as the index
procedure was performed in 70% of patients, and 25% had additional amputation
procedures. Of readmissions at ≤ 30 days, 52% were amputation-related. Overall
mortality during follow-up was 86.9%; 37 patients (10.2%) died within 30 days.
Among patients surviving >30 days, multivariate Poisson regression demonstrated
that younger age (incidence rate ratio [IRR], 0.98), public insurance (IRR,
1.63), CHF (IRR, 1.60), and RF (IRR, 2.12) were associated with increased cLOS.
Diabetes with complications (IRR, 1.90) and RF (IRR, 2.47) affected subsequent
amputation procedures. CHF (IRR, 1.83) and RF (IRR, 3.67) were associated with a 
greater number of cardiovascular procedures. Cox proportional hazard modeling
indicated older age (hazard ratio [HR], 1.04), CHF (HR, 2.26), and RF (HR, 2.60) 
were risk factors for decreased survival. Factors associated with SES were not
significantly related to the outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study found that RU is high for amputees, and increased RU
persists beyond the perioperative period. Results were similar across SES
indices, suggesting higher SES may not be protective against poor outcomes when
limb salvage is no longer attainable. These findings support the hypothesis that 
SES disparities may be more modifiable during earlier stages of care for critical
limb ischemia.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMID: 23312839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Data Strateg Benchmarks. 2000 Apr;4(4):49-53.

Hospitals cut CHF readmissions with benchmarking.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 11066657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Congest Heart Fail. 2012 May-Jun;18(3):165-72. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-7133.2011.00257.x. Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Poor prognosis in chronic heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction
in China.

Cheng Z(1), Zhu K, Chen T, Gao P, Cheng K, Fang L, Deng H, Zhu W, Fang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union 
Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

Most Chinese cardiologists are challenged by the high mortality rate of heart
failure (HF) in patients with reduced ejection fraction in China. This study was 
designed as a single-center, retrospective study. All consecutive HF patients
with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) ≤ 45% from January 1, 2007, to
December 31, 2009, were enrolled. The primary outcome was all-cause mortality.
The secondary outcome was all-cause mortality or the first cardiovascular
readmission event. A total of 187 patients comprised the study population,
classified into two groups: LVEF ≤ 35% (n=83) and LVEF 36% to 45% (n=104). The
median follow-up was 18 months (2-41 months). All-cause mortality was 27% among
patients with LVEF ≤ 35%, as compared with 14% among those with LVEF 36% to 45%
(P=.025). All-cause mortality or first cardiovascular readmission rates were 53% 
and 32% among patients with LVEF ≤ 35% and 36% to 45% (P=.003), respectively. The
predictors of all-cause mortality were advanced age and New York Heart
Association functional class, chronic kidney disease, oral β-blockers, and
statins at discharge. The prognosis of chronic HF patients with LVEF ≤ 45% was
poor in China, especially for patients with LVEF ≤ 35%. Cardiologists should
provide further efforts to improve the prognosis of HF in Chinese patients.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22587746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Int J Cardiol. 2010 Feb 18;139(1):60-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2008.09.003. Epub
2008 Oct 12.

Quality of life predicts outcome in a heart failure disease management program.

O'Loughlin C(1), Murphy NF, Conlon C, O'Donovan A, Ledwidge M, McDonald K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, St Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Chronic heart failure (HF) is associated with a poor Health Related
Quality of Life (HRQoL). HRQoL has been shown to be a predictor of HF outcomes
however, variability in the study designs make it difficult to apply these
findings to a clinical setting. The aim of this study was to establish if HRQoL
is a predictor of long-term mortality and morbidity in HF patients followed-up in
a disease management program (DMP) and if a HRQoL instrument could be applied to 
aid in identifying high-risk patients within a clinical context.
METHODS: This is a retrospective analysis of HF patients attending a DMP with
18+/-9 months follow-up. Clinical and biochemical parameters were recorded on
discharge from index HF admission and HRQoL measures were recorded at 2 weeks
post index admission.
RESULTS: 225 patients were enrolled into the study (mean age=69+/-12 years,
male=61%, and 78%=systolic HF). In multivariable analysis, all dimensions of
HRQoL (measured by the Minnesota Living with HF Questionnaire) were independent
predictors of both mortality and readmissions particularly in patients <80 years.
A significant interaction between HRQoL and age (Total((HRQoL))age: p<0.001)
indicated that the association of HRQoL with outcomes diminished as age
increased.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that HRQoL is a predictor of outcome in HF
patients managed in a DMP. Younger patients (<65 years) with a Total HRQoL score 
of > or =50 are at high risk of an adverse outcome. In older patients > or =80
years HRQoL is not useful in predicting outcome.

Copyright 2008 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 18851887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Arch Intern Med. 2008 Jul 14;168(13):1371-86. doi: 10.1001/archinte.168.13.1371.

Statistical models and patient predictors of readmission for heart failure: a
systematic review.

Ross JS(1), Mulvey GK, Stauffer B, Patlolla V, Bernheim SM, Keenan PS, Krumholz
HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics and Adult Development, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, One Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1070, New York, NY 10029, USA.
joseph.ross@mssm.edu

BACKGROUND: Readmission after heart failure (HF) hospitalization is an increasing
focus for physicians and policy makers, but statistical models are needed to
assess patient risk and to compare hospital performance. We performed a
systematic review to describe models designed to compare hospital rates of
readmission or to predict patients' risk of readmission, as well as to identify
studies evaluating patient characteristics associated with hospital readmission, 
all among patients admitted for HF.
METHODS: We identified relevant studies published between January 1, 1950, and
November 19, 2007, by searching MEDLINE, Scopus, PsycINFO, and all 4 Ovid
Evidence-Based Medicine Reviews. Eligible English-language publications reported 
on readmission after HF hospitalization among adult patients. We excluded
experimental studies and publications without original data or quantitative
outcomes.
RESULTS: From 941 potentially relevant articles, 117 met inclusion criteria: none
contained models to compare readmission rates among hospitals, 5 (4.3%) presented
models to predict patients' risk of readmission, and 112 (95.7%) examined patient
characteristics associated with readmission. Studies varied in case
identification, used multiple types of data sources, found few patient
characteristics consistently associated with readmission, and examined differing 
outcomes, often either readmission alone or a combined outcome of readmission or 
death, measured across varying periods (from 14 days to 4 years). Two articles
reported model discriminations of patient readmission risk, both of which were
modest (C statistic, 0.60 for both).
CONCLUSIONS: Our systematic review identified no model designed to compare
hospital rates of readmission, while models designed to predict patients'
readmission risk used heterogeneous approaches and found substantial
inconsistencies regarding which patient characteristics were predictive.
Clinically, patient risk stratification is challenging. From a policy
perspective, a validated risk-standardized statistical model to accurately
profile hospitals using readmission rates is unavailable in the published
English-language literature to date.

PMID: 18625917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Vessels. 2011 May;26(3):313-20. doi: 10.1007/s00380-010-0057-5. Epub 2010
Nov 10.

Prognostic importance of comorbidities in heart failure with preserved left
ventricular ejection fraction.

Maréchaux S(1), Six-Carpentier MM, Bouabdallaoui N, Montaigne D, Bauchart JJ,
Mouquet F, Auffray JL, Le Tourneau T, Asseman P, LeJemtel TH, Ennezat PV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Centre Hospitalier Régional et Universitaire de Lille,
59019, Lille, France.

The relative impact of comorbidities and parameters of left ventricular diastolic
function on clinical outcome has not been thoroughly investigated in patients who
are hospitalized for heart failure decompensation and found to have preserved
ejection fraction. We identified 98 HFpEF patients among 1452 patients admitted
with acute heart failure. Clinical characteristics, hemoglobin levels, estimated 
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and
Doppler-echocardiographic parameters were analyzed. The primary end point of the 
study combined death and rehospitalization for decompensated heart failure after 
the index hospitalization. Mean age was 76 ± 9 years. LV ejection fraction, E/E
(a) ratio, and estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure were 61 (55-67)%,
12.9 (9.4-15.1), 40 (32-46) mmHg, respectively. BNP values, hemoglobin and eGFR
were 287 (164-562) pg/mL, 11.3 (10.4-12.4) g/dL and 45 (37-74) mL/min/m(2),
respectively. During a mean follow-up of 17 ± 11 months, 56% reached the primary 
endpoint of the study: 31 died and 24 were re-hospitalised for heart failure.
Diabetes [HR = 1.76 (1.03-3.00), P = 0.039], lower systolic blood pressure [HR = 
0.99 (0.97-0.99), P = 0.016], hemoglobin [HR = 0.62 (0.49-0.76), P < 0.0001], and
eGFR [HR = 0.98 (0.97-0.99), P = 0.004] were associated with a poor outcome.
Neither BNP nor echocardiographic parameters were correlated with outcome.
Comorbidities primarily correlate with outcome in patients with HFpEF.

PMID: 21063875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Aust Health Rev. 2013 Jun;37(3):362-8. doi: 10.1071/AH12042.

Hospital readmission among older adults with congestive heart failure.

Islam T(1), O'Connell B, Lakhan P.

Author information: 
(1)Deakin-Southern Health Nursing Research Centre, Clayton South, Australia.
tislam@deakin.edu.au

INTRODUCTION: To examine the factors associated with unplanned readmission among 
older adults with congestive heart failure (CHF) within 28 days of discharge from
an index admission, within a large Australian health service.
METHODS: Using a comparative cohort design, a multivariate logistic regression
model was used to compare readmitted patients with non-readmitted patients and
identify risk factors associated with readmission.
RESULTS: Significant risk factors identified were male gender, numerous
diagnoses, length of stay 3 days or longer and patients being admitted from
acute, subacute or aged-care facilities.
CONCLUSIONS: The high risk of patients being readmitted from acute, subacute and 
aged-care services requires further review as these readmissions may be
avoidable. It may also be useful to develop a readmission risk screening tool so 
that patients at risk of readmission can be identified. What is known about this 
topic? Older adults with CHF are likely to experience multiple readmissions to
hospital. There have been several studies conducted on hospital readmissions;
however, generalising the findings is problematic due to the use of variable
definitions of what constitutes a readmission. What does this paper add? This
paper addresses the absence of Australian research comparing groups of older
patients with CHF who are readmitted to hospital with those who are not
readmitted. It also adopts one of the more frequently used definitions of
readmission to aid in future comparability of research. What are the implications
for practice? Further work is necessary to improve discharge planning and
effectively manage chronic illnesses such as CHF in patients' homes. It may be
useful to develop a readmission risk screening tool for staff of inpatient
medical wards so that these at-risk patients can be identified before discharge.

PMID: 23701906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Kardiologiia. 2002;42(5):56-61.

[Effect of therapeutic education of patients with chronic heart failure on
quality of life and requirement of rehospitalizations. Results of 12-months
randomized study].

[Article in Russian]

Giliarevskiĭ SR, Orlov VA, Khamaganova LK, Bendeliani NG, Boeva OA, Seredenina
EM.

PMID: 12494151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2003 Sep 1;92(5):625-8.

Usefulness of anemia as a predictor of death and rehospitalization in patients
with decompensated heart failure.

Felker GM(1), Gattis WA, Leimberger JD, Adams KF, Cuffe MS, Gheorghiade M,
O'Connor CM.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, North Carolina 27715, USA.
felke001@mc.duke.edu

We investigated the prevalence of anemia and its relation to clinical events in
patients with decompensated heart failure enrolled in the OPTIME-CHF study. Our
data demonstrate that anemia is common in patients hospitalized with
decompensated heart failure and is associated with a greater number of co-morbid 
conditions. Lower baseline hemoglobin is associated with risk of short-term
adverse clinical outcomes in this population, even after controlling for other
baseline differences.

PMID: 12943893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Surg Forum. 2010 Aug;13(4):E212-7. doi: 10.1532/HSF98.20101009.

Readmission to the intensive care unit after fast-track cardiac surgery: an
analysis of risk factors and outcome according to the type of operation.

Toraman F(1), Senay S, Gullu U, Karabulut H, Alhan C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Reanimation, School of Medicine, Acibadem
University, Istanbul, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: In the present study, we investigated risk factors for intensive
care unit (ICU) readmission after fasttrack cardiac surgery and analyzed outcome 
data according to the type of surgical procedure.
METHODS: Between 1999 and 2008, we prospectively enrolled 4270 consecutive
patients who underwent isolated coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) (CABG
group, n = 3754), isolated valve surgery (valve group, n = 353), or combined CABG
and valve surgery (CABG + valve group, n = 163) in the study.
RESULTS: Ninety-eight patients (2.2%) were readmitted to the ICU. Of these
patients, 73 were in the CABG group (1.9% of this group), 16 were in the valve
group (4.5%), and 9 were in the CABG + valve group (5.5%). The main reason for
ICU readmission in all groups was respiratory distress. A multivariate analysis
showed that the independent risk factors for ICU readmission in the CABG group
were an age >65 years (odds ratio [OR], 2.9; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.5-5.4; P = .001), peripheral arterial disease (OR, 2.7; 95% CI, 1.2-6.1; P =
.016), and drainage >500 mL (OR, 2.5; 95% CI, 1.2-5.1; P = .009). The independent
risk factors for the valve group included only preoperative congestive heart
failure (OR, 3.9; 95% CI, 1.3-11.7; P = .01). No independent risk factor was
defined for the CABG + valve group. Mortality was significantly higher among the 
readmitted patients in all groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The risk factors for readmission after cardiac surgery with
fast-track recovery may differ according to the type of operation. A strict
control of volume balance and blood transfusion may further help prevent the
occurrence of the most frequent cause of readmission, respiratory failure.

PMID: 20719721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Chest. 1999 Sep;116(3):688-92.

Surgical ICU recidivism after cardiac operations.

Cohn WE(1), Sellke FW, Sirois C, Lisbon A, Johnson RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

BACKGROUND: Decreasing the ICU length of stay (LOS) after cardiac operations may 
increase ICU recidivism, obviating the benefit of early discharge.
METHODS: From January 1, 1994 to January 1, 1998, there were 2,388 consecutive
cardiac operations, from which 2,228 patients were discharged alive from the ICU 
and had sufficient information to determine their incidence of ICU return, the
reasons for their return, their ICU LOS (initial and secondary LOS), and
mortality.
RESULTS: A decrease occurred in the initial ICU LOS from 1994 through 1997
(medians for 1994, 1995, 1996, and 1997, respectively: 31 h, 26.4 h, 24.5 h, and 
24 h; and means, respectively: 69.4 +/- 139.8, 62.8 +/- 114.1, 52.5 +/- 104.0,
and 56.2 +/- 103.4 h; p = 0.048). In association with this, however, ICU
recidivism increased (as percentage of discharges, respectively: 3.9%, 4.2%,
6.1%, and 8.4%; p = 0.005). Inclusive of secondary ICU LOS, the total ICU LOS
hours still decreased over the 4-year period. Most notably, the incidence of
readmission increased with longer initial LOS (initial LOS quartiles from
shortest to longest: 3.9%, 5.2%, 4.7%, and 9.2%; p = 0.0008). Predictors of ICU
recidivism included preoperatively, a history of congestive heart failure, and a 
lower mean left ventricular ejection fraction (52.7 +/- 19.3% vs 49.8 +/- 21.5%; 
p = 0.0080); and, postoperatively, an increased mean weight gain (8.5 +/- 5.6 kg 
vs 10.3 +/- 4.7 kg; p = 0.040) and longer mean initial ventilator time (157 +/-
299 h vs 35 +/- 107 h; p = 0.038). The most common reason for readmission was
pulmonary problems.
CONCLUSIONS: Over the years studied, the initial ICU LOS after cardiac operations
has decreased in association with a significant increase in ICU recidivism.
Importantly, however, patients readmitted to the ICU are those with longer
initial LOSs. Decreased initial stay does not account for our increased ICU
recidivism, and efforts to decrease ICU recidivism can focus on the patients with
poor preoperative cardiac function and longer initial ICU stays.

PMID: 10492272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JACC Heart Fail. 2013 Feb;1(1):31-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2012.11.001. Epub 2013
Feb 4.

Unplanned hospital readmissions after HeartMate II implantation: frequency, risk 
factors, and impact on resource use and survival.

Smedira NG(1), Hoercher KJ(2), Lima B(3), Mountis MM(4), Starling RC(4), Thuita
L(5), Schmuhl DM(2), Blackstone EH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart and Vascular
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. Electronic address:
smidern@ccf.org. (2)Kaufman Center for Heart Failure, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio. (3)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart and 
Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. (4)Department of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio. (5)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. (6)Department of Thoracic and
Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio; Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Research Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to identify potential areas for quality
improvement and cost containment. We investigated readmissions after HeartMate II
left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation by characterizing their type, 
temporal frequency, causative factors, and resource use and survival after
readmission.
BACKGROUND: The HeartMate II LVAD provides enhanced survival and quality of life 
to end-stage heart failure patients. Whether these improved outcomes are
accompanied by a similar reduction in unplanned hospital readmissions is largely 
unknown.
METHODS: From October 2004 to January 2010, 118 patients received a HeartMate II,
of whom 92 were discharged on device support. Subsequent readmissions were
analyzed using prospectively maintained clinical and financial databases.
RESULTS: Forty-eight patients (52%) had 177 unplanned hospital readmissions, 87
non-LVAD- and 90 LVAD-associated. Reasons for non-LVAD-associated readmissions
included medical management of comorbidities and progression of cardiac pathology
(n = 48), neuropsychiatric/psychosocial issues (n = 22), and infections (n = 17).
Those for LVAD-associated readmissions included device component infection (n =
51), management of nontherapeutic anticoagulation or device malfunction (n = 22),
and bleeding (n = 15). Cumulative incidence of unplanned readmissions was higher 
(p < 0.0001) for destination therapy than bridge-to-transplant patients
(9/patient vs. 4/patient at 24 months). Cumulative hospital days overall were 25 
and 42 at 12 and 18 months, respectively, and the costs were 18% and 29% of
initial implantation costs. Increased number of unplanned readmissions was
predictive of mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Unplanned readmissions are common during HeartMate II support and
negatively affect resource use and survival. Refining patient selection,
especially in destination therapy patients, reducing infectious and bleeding
complications, and increasing awareness about these devices might reduce
unnecessary readmissions.

Copyright © 2013 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24621797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004 Feb 18;43(4):635-41.

Predischarge B-type natriuretic peptide assay for identifying patients at high
risk of re-admission after decompensated heart failure.

Logeart D(1), Thabut G, Jourdain P, Chavelas C, Beyne P, Beauvais F, Bouvier E,
Solal AC.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Cardiologie, Hôpital Beaujon, Clichy, France.
damien.logeart@bjn.ap-hop-paris.fr

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine the value of serial B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP) assay for predicting post-discharge outcome of patients
admitted for decompensated congestive heart failure (CHF).
BACKGROUND: Patients hospitalized for decompensated CHF are frequently
re-admitted. Thus, identification of high-risk patients before their discharge is
a major issue that remains challenging. B-type natriuretic peptide measurement
could be useful.
METHODS: Serial BNP measurements were performed from admission to discharge in
two samples of consecutive patients. Survivors were monitored for six months; the
main end point combined death or first re-admission for CHF.
RESULTS: Among the 105 survivors of the derivation study, all serial BNP values, 
percentage change in BNP levels, and predischarge Doppler mitral pattern
correlated with the outcome. In contrast, clinical variables and left ventricular
ejection fraction were poorly predictive. The predischarge BNP assay had the best
discriminative power (area under the receiver operating characteristic [ROC]
curve = 0.80) and remained the lone significant variable in multivariate analysis
(hazard ratio [HR] = 1.14 [95% confidence interval [CI], 1.02 to 1.28], p =
0.027). Among the 97 survivors of the validation study, the predischarge BNP
assay was also the most predictive parameter (area under the ROC curve = 0.83).
The risk of death or re-admission increased in stepwise fashion across increasing
predischarge BNP ranges (p < 0.0001). After adjustment for baseline covariables, 
the HRs were 5.1 [95% CI 2.8 to 9.1] for BNP levels between 350 and 700 ng/l and 
15.2 [95% CI 8.5 to 27] for BNP levels >700 ng/l, compared with BNP <350 ng/l.
CONCLUSIONS: High predischarge BNP assay is a strong, independent marker of death
or re-admission after decompensated CHF, more relevant than common clinical or
echocardiographic parameters and more relevant than changes in BNP levels during 
acute cares.

PMID: 14975475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Cardiol J. 2013;20(5):506-12. doi: 10.5603/CJ.2013.0136.

Hyponatremia as predictor of worse outcome in real world patients admitted with
acute heart failure.

Arévalo Lorido JC(1), Carretero Gómez J, Formiga F, Montero Pérez-Barquero M,
Trullás Vila JC, Aramburu Bodas O, Ceresuela LM; RICA Investigators.

Collaborators: Aramburu O, Arias-Jiménez JL, Anarte L, Casado J, Cerqueiro JM,
Chivite D, Conde A, Díez-Manglano J, Epelde F, Formiga F, Grau J, Manzano L,
Montero M, Muela A, Pérez-Bocanegra C, Pérez-Calvo JI, Prado B, Recio J, Sánchez 
C, Urrutia A.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Service, Hospital de Zafra, Zafra, Badajoz, Spain.
joscarlor@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Our aim was to determine if hyponatremia, defined as serum sodium
level < 135 mmol/L, is a predictor of worse outcome in a cohort of real-world
patients with heartfailure (HF).
METHODS: We used data of the National registry of HF (RICA) from Spain, an
ongoing multicenter, prospective cohort study. The patients were assigned to two 
groups regarding sodium levels. Primary end-point was first all-cause
readmission, or death by any cause. Secondary end-points were the number of days 
hospitalized, and the presence of complications.
RESULTS: We identified 973 patients, 147 (15.11%) with hyponatremia. The median
age of patients enrolled was 77.25 ± 8.79 years-old, the global comorbidity
measured by Charlson comorbidity index (CCI) was upper 3 points and preserved
ejection fraction was present in67.1% of them. Clinical complications during
admission were significantly higher in the patients with hyponatremia (35.41%, p 
< 0.001) and this remained as significant predictor after logistic regression
adjustment (OR 1.08, p < 0.01). Also mortality and readmissions were more
frequent in patients with hyponatremia (20.69% and 22.41%, respectively) but
after Cox regression adjustment hyponatremia in our cohort was not associated
with increase in 90-day all-cause mortality and readmissions, and only CCI
remained significant for primaryend-point (HR 1.08, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Hyponatremia is an independent predictor of complications during
hospitalization in our real-world cohort, but was not associated with 90 days
mortality or readmissions. Global comorbidity, however, played an important role,
and could influence the mortality and readmissions of our patients.

PMID: 24469874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart. 2014 Jun;100(12):923-9. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2013-305294. Epub 2014 Mar
19.

Prospective development and validation of a model to predict heart failure
hospitalisation.

Cubbon RM(1), Woolston A(2), Adams B(1), Gale CP(3), Gilthorpe MS(2), Baxter
PD(2), Kearney LC(1), Mercer B(1), Rajwani A(1), Batin PD(4), Kahn M(1), Sapsford
RJ(5), Witte KK(1), Kearney MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leeds Multidisciplinary Cardiovascular Research Centre, University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK. (2)Centre of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK. (3)Leeds Multidisciplinary Cardiovascular Research Centre, University 
of Leeds, Leeds, UK Centre of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of
Leeds, Leeds, UK. (4)Mid Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust, Wakefield, UK. (5)Leeds
Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Acute heart failure syndrome (AHFS) is a major cause of
hospitalisation and imparts a substantial burden on patients and healthcare
systems. Tools to define risk of AHFS hospitalisation are lacking.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study (n=628) of patients with stable chronic heart
failure (CHF) secondary to left ventricular systolic dysfunction was used to
derive an AHFS prediction model which was then assessed in a prospectively
recruited validation cohort (n=462).
RESULTS: Within the derivation cohort, 44 (7%) patients were hospitalised as a
result of AHFS during 1 year of follow-up. Predictors of AHFS hospitalisation
included furosemide equivalent dose, the presence of type 2 diabetes mellitus,
AHFS hospitalisation within the previous year and pulmonary congestion on chest
radiograph, all assessed at baseline. A multivariable model containing these four
variables exhibited good calibration (Hosmer-Lemeshow p=0.38) and discrimination 
(C-statistic 0.77; 95% CI 0.71 to 0.84). Using a 2.5% risk cut-off for predicted 
AHFS, the model defined 38.5% of patients as low risk, with negative predictive
value of 99.1%; this low risk cohort exhibited <1% excess all-cause mortality per
annum when compared with contemporaneous actuarial data. Within the validation
cohort, an identically applied model derived comparable performance parameters
(C-statistic 0.81 (95% CI 0.74 to 0.87), Hosmer-Lemeshow p=0.15, negative
predictive value 100%).
CONCLUSIONS: A prospectively derived and validated model using simply obtained
clinical data can identify patients with CHF at low risk of hospitalisation due
to AHFS in the year following assessment. This may guide the design of future
strategies allocating resources to the management of CHF.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4033182
PMID: 24647052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2002 Oct;1(3):183-8.

Psychosocial factors and their association with clinical outcomes in patients
with heart failure: why clinicians do not seem to care.

Moser DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, University of Kentucky, 527 CON/HSLC Building, Lexington, 
KY 40536-0232, USA. dmoser@uky.edu

Poor quality of life, social isolation, depression and anxiety all have been
linked to increased risk of rehospitalization and mortality in patients with
heart failure. Yet, despite evidence of their importance to outcomes in heart
failure patients, psychosocial factors are assessed and treated infrequently in
clinical practice. Potential reasons for this include: (1) inadequate
dissemination of research about the link between psychosocial factors and
outcomes; (2) insufficient training in heart-mind interactions that precludes
clinicians from taking advantage of what is known; (3) perceived problems with
interventions or with the science of heart-mind interactions that interfere with 
acceptance of what is known; (4) concerns about how to measure psychosocial
factors in clinical practice; and (5) lack of curiosity from clinicians about the
role of psychosocial factors in their patients. In this article, each of these
possible explanations is explored and recommendations suggested.

PMID: 14622672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Manag Care. 2011 Jan;17(1):41-8.

Relationship between patient satisfaction with inpatient care and hospital
readmission within 30 days.

Boulding W(1), Glickman SW, Manary MP, Schulman KA, Staelin R.

Author information: 
(1)The Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether hospitals where patients report higher overall
satisfaction with their interactions among the hospital and staff and
specifically their experience with the discharge process are more likely to have 
lower 30-day readmission rates after adjustment for hospital clinical
performance.
STUDY DESIGN: Among patients 18 years or older, an observational analysis was
conducted using Hospital Compare data on clinical performance, patient
satisfaction, and 30-day risk-standardized readmission rates for acute myocardial
infarction, heart failure, and pneumonia for the period July 2005 through June
2008.
METHODS: A hospital-level multivariable logistic regression analysis was
performed for each of 3 clinical conditions to determine the relationship between
patient-reported measures of their satisfaction with the hospital stay and staff 
and the discharge process and 30-day readmission rates, while controlling for
clinical performance.
RESULTS: In samples ranging from 1798 hospitals for acute myocardial infarction
to 2562 hospitals for pneumonia, higher hospital-level patient satisfaction
scores (overall and for discharge planning) were independently associated with
lower 30-day readmission rates for acute myocardial infarction (odds ratio [OR]
for readmission per interquartile improvement in hospital score, 0.97; 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.94-0.99), heart failure (OR, 0.96; 95% CI,
0.95-0.97), and pneumonia (OR, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.96-0.99). These improvements were 
between 1.6 and 4.9 times higher than those for the 3 clinical performance
measures.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher overall patient satisfaction and satisfaction with discharge 
planning are associated with lower 30-day risk-standardized hospital readmission 
rates after adjusting for clinical quality. This finding suggests that
patient-centered information can have an important role in the evaluation and
management of hospital performance.

PMID: 21348567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2010 Sep;3(5):459-67. doi:
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.110.957613. Epub 2010 Aug 24.

National patterns of risk-standardized mortality and readmission for acute
myocardial infarction and heart failure. Update on publicly reported outcomes
measures based on the 2010 release.

Bernheim SM(1), Grady JN, Lin Z, Wang Y, Wang Y, Savage SV, Bhat KR, Ross JS,
Desai MM, Merrill AR, Han LF, Rapp MT, Drye EE, Normand SL, Krumholz HM.

Author information: 
(1)Yale New Haven Health Services Corporation/Center for Outcomes Research and
Evaluation, 1 Church Street, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. susannah.bernheim@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: Patient outcomes provide a critical perspective on quality of care.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is publicly reporting
hospital 30-day risk-standardized mortality rates (RSMRs) and risk-standardized
readmission rates (RSRRs) for patients hospitalized with acute myocardial
infarction (AMI) and heart failure (HF). We provide a national perspective on
hospital performance for the 2010 release of these measures.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The hospital RSMRs and RSRRs are calculated from Medicare
claims data for fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries, 65 years or older,
hospitalized with AMI or HF between July 1, 2006, and June 30, 2009. The rates
are calculated using hierarchical logistic modeling to account for patient
clustering, and are risk-adjusted for age, sex, and patient comorbidities. The
median RSMR for AMI was 16.0% and for HF was 10.8%. Both measures had a wide
range of hospital performance with an absolute 5.2% difference between hospitals 
in the 5th versus 95th percentile for AMI and 5.0% for HF. The median RSRR for
AMI was 19.9% and for HF was 24.5% (3.9% range for 5th to 95th percentile for
AMI, 6.7% for HF). Distinct regional patterns were evident for both measures and 
both conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: High RSRRs persist for AMI and HF and clinically meaningful
variation exists for RSMRs and RSRRs for both conditions. Our results suggest
continued opportunities for improvement in patient outcomes for HF and AMI.

PMCID: PMC3027304
PMID: 20736442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart. 2014 Nov;100(22):1780-5. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-305747. Epub 2014 Jul 
1.

Low prealbumin is strongly associated with adverse outcome in heart failure.

Lourenço P(1), Silva S(1), Friões F(1), Alvelos M(1), Amorim M(1), Couto M(1),
Torres-Ramalho P(1), Guimarães JT(2), Araújo JP(1), Bettencourt P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Medicina Interna, Centro Hospitalar São João, Faculdade de Medicina
da Universidade do Porto, Unidade I&D Cardiovascular do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Serviço de Patologia Clínica, Centro Hospitalar São João, Faculdade de
Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal Departamento de Bioquímica,
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

OBJECTIVE: Prealbumin is one of the best indicators of nutritional status. We
previously showed that prealbumin predicted in-hospital mortality in heart
failure (HF) patients. We evaluated if a low discharge prealbumin after admission
with acute HF would predict morbidity and mortality.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective observational study. Patients admitted with a
primary diagnosis of HF were studied. Follow-up was up to 6 months. Endpoints
analysed were: all-cause and HF-death; all-cause and worsening HF
hospitalisation. Patients with discharge prealbumin ≤15.0 mg/dL and those with
prealbumin >15 mg/dL were compared. A Cox-regression analysis was used to
evaluate the prognostic impact of low prealbumin.
RESULTS: We studied 514 patients. Mean age was 78 years and 45.7% were male.
During follow-up, 101 patients died (78 for HF) and 209 patients were hospital
readmitted (140 for worsening HF). Median prealbumin was 20.1 (15.3-25.3) mg/dL. 
Patients with lower prealbumin were more often women, older aged and with
non-ischaemic HF; they had lower albumin, haemoglobin and total cholesterol; and 
higher glomerular filtration rate, C-reactive protein, B-type natriuretic peptide
and length of hospital stay. Lower prealbumin associated with less β-blocker and 
statin use. Patients with discharge prealbumin ≤15 mg/dL had a multivariate
adjusted HR of 6-month all-cause and HF death of 1.67 (1.00 to 2.80) and 2.12
(1.19 to 3.79) respectively and of all-cause and HF readmission of 1.47 (1.01 to 
2.14) and 1.58 (1.01 to 2.47).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with discharge prealbumin ≤15 mg/dL have an higher risk of 
6 months morbidity and mortality. The unbalance between protein-energy demands
and its availability predicts ominous HF outcome.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24986895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circulation. 2011 Aug 9;124(6):712-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.026088.
Epub 2011 Jul 25.

The need for multiple measures of hospital quality: results from the Get with the
Guidelines-Heart Failure Registry of the American Heart Association.

Hernandez AF(1), Fonarow GC, Liang L, Heidenreich PA, Yancy C, Peterson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, NC 27715, USA.
adrian.hernandez@duke.edu

BACKGROUND: Process and outcome measures are often used to quantify quality of
care in hospitals. Whether these quality measures correlate with one another and 
the degree to which hospital provider rankings shift on the basis of the
performance metric is uncertain.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Heart failure patients ≥ 65 years of age hospitalized in the
Get With the Guidelines-Heart Failure registry of the American Heart Association 
were linked to Medicare claims from 2005 to 2006. Hospitals were ranked by (1)
composite adherence scores for 5 heart failure process measures, (2) composite
adherence scores for emerging quality measures, (3) risk-adjusted 30-day death
after admission, and (4) risk-adjusted 30-day readmission after discharge.
Hierarchical models using shrinkage estimates were performed to adjust for case
mix and hospital volume. There were 19 483 patients hospitalized from 2005 to
2006 from 153 hospitals. The overall median composite adherence rate to heart
process measures was 85.8% (25th, 75th percentiles 77.5, 91.4). Median 30-day
risk-adjusted mortality was 9.0% (7.9, 10.4). Median risk-adjusted 30-day
readmission was 22.9% (22.1, 23.5). The weighted κ for remaining within the top
20th percentile or bottom 20th percentile was ≤ 0.15 and the Spearman correlation
overall was ≤ 0.21 between the different measures of quality of care. The average
shift in ranks was 33 positions (13, 68) when criteria were changed from 30-day
mortality to readmission and 51 positions (22, 76) when ranking metric changed
from 30-day mortality to composite process adherence.
CONCLUSIONS: Agreement between different methods of ranking hospital-based
quality of care and 30-day mortality or readmission rankings was poor. Profiling 
quality of care will require multidimensional ranking methods and/or additional
measures.

PMID: 21788585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Chest. 2005 Jun;127(6):2042-8.

Improving outcomes in heart failure in the community: long-term survival benefit 
of a disease-management program.

Akosah KO(1), Schaper AM, Haus LM, Mathiason MA, Barnhart SI, McHugh VL.

Author information: 
(1)Gundersen Lutheran Health System, 1900 South Ave, La Crosse, WI 54601, USA.
koakosah@gundluth.org

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of our current study was to determine whether our
disease-management model was associated with long-term survival benefits. A
secondary objective was to determine whether program involvement was associated
with medication maintenance and reduced hospitalization over time compared to
usual care management of heart failure.
DESIGN: A retrospective chart review was conducted in patients who had been
hospitalized for congestive heart failure between April 1999 and March 31, 2000, 
and had been discharged from the hospital for follow-up in the Heart Failure
Clinic vs usual care.
SETTING: An integrated health-care center serving a tristate area.
PATIENTS: Patients (n = 101) were followed up for 4 years after their index
hospitalization for congestive heart failure.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: The patients followed up in the Heart Failure Clinic
comprised group 1 (n = 38), and the patients receiving usual care made up group 2
(n = 63). The mean (+/- SD) age of the patients in group 1 was 68 +/- 16 years
compared to 76 +/- 11 years for the patients in group 2 (p = 0.002). The patients
in group 1 were more likely to have renal failure (p = 0.035), a lower left
ventricular ejection fraction (p = 0.005), and hypotension at baseline (p =
0.002). At year 2, more patients in group 1 were maintained by therapy with
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or angiotensin receptor blockers
(ARBs) [p = 0.036]. The survival rate over 4 years was better for group 1.
Univariate Cox proportional hazard ratios revealed that age, not receiving ACEIs 
or ARBs, and renal disease or cancer at baseline were associated with mortality. 
When controlling for these variables in a multivariate Cox proportional hazards
ratio model, survival differences between groups remained significant (p =
0.021). Subjects in group 2 were 2.4 times more likely to die over the 4-year
period than those in group 1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that, after controlling for baseline
variables, patients participating in a heart failure clinic enjoyed improved
survival.

PMID: 15947318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JAMA. 2013 May 15;309(19):2025-34. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.4982.

Association of single- vs dual-chamber ICDs with mortality, readmissions, and
complications among patients receiving an ICD for primary prevention.

Peterson PN(1), Varosy PD, Heidenreich PA, Wang Y, Dewland TA, Curtis JP, Go AS, 
Greenlee RT, Magid DJ, Normand SL, Masoudi FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Denver Health Medical Center, 777 Bannock St, MC 0960,
Denver, CO 80204, USA. Pamela.Peterson@ucdenver.edu

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013 Jul;10(7):364.

IMPORTANCE: Randomized trials of implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs)
for primary prevention predominantly used single-chamber devices. In clinical
practice, patients often receive dual-chamber ICDs, even without clear
indications for pacing. The outcomes of dual- vs single-chamber devices are
uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: To compare outcomes of single- and dual-chamber ICDs for primary
prevention of sudden cardiac death.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Retrospective cohort study of admissions in
the National Cardiovascular Data Registry's (NCDR) ICD registry from 2006-2009
that could be linked to Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services fee-for-service 
Medicare claims data. Patients were included if they received an ICD for primary 
prevention and did not have a documented indication for pacing.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Adjusted risks of 1-year mortality, all-cause
readmission, heart failure readmission, and device-related complications within
90 days were estimated with propensity-score matching based on patient,
clinician, and hospital factors.
RESULTS: Among 32,034 patients, 12,246 (38%) received a single-chamber device and
19,788 (62%) received a dual-chamber device. In a propensity-matched cohort,
rates of complications were lower for single-chamber devices (3.51% vs 4.72%; P <
.001; risk difference, -1.20 [95% CI, -1.72 to -0.69]), but device type was not
significantly associated with 1-year mortality (unadjusted rate, 9.85% vs 9.77%; 
hazard ratio [HR], 0.99 [95% CI, 0.91 to 1.07]; P = .79), 1-year all-cause
hospitalization (unadjusted rate, 43.86% vs 44.83%; HR, 1.00 [95% CI, 0.97-1.04];
P = .82), or hospitalization for heart failure (unadjusted rate, 14.73% vs
15.38%; HR, 1.05 [95% CI, 0.99-1.12]; P = .19).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients receiving an ICD for primary prevention
without indications for pacing, the use of a dual-chamber device compared with a 
single-chamber device was associated with a higher risk of device-related
complications and similar 1-year mortality and hospitalization outcomes. Reasons 
for preferentially using dual-chamber ICDs in this setting remains unclear.

PMCID: PMC3752924
PMID: 23677314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2013 Nov;106(11):570-85. doi: 10.1016/j.acvd.2013.08.002.
Epub 2013 Oct 18.

First hospitalization for heart failure in France in 2009: patient
characteristics and 30-day follow-up.

Tuppin P(1), Cuerq A, de Peretti C, Fagot-Campagna A, Danchin N, Juillière Y,
Alla F, Allemand H, Bauters C, Drici MD, Hagège A, Jondeau G, Jourdain P,
Leizorovicz A, Paccaud F.

Author information: 
(1)Caisse Nationale d'Assurance Maladie des Travailleurs Salariés (CNAMTS),
Paris, France. Electronic address: philippe.tuppin@cnamts.fr.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of heart failure (HF) is stable in industrialized
countries, but its prevalence continues to increase, especially due to the ageing
of the population, and mortality remains high.
OBJECTIVE: To estimate the incidence in France and describe the management and
short-term outcome of patients hospitalized for HF for the first time.
METHOD: The study population comprised French national health insurance general
scheme beneficiaries (77% of the French population) hospitalized in 2009 with a
principal diagnosis of HF after exclusion of those hospitalized for HF between
2006 and 2008 or with a chronic disease status for HF. Data were collected from
the national health insurance information system (SNIIRAM).
RESULTS: A total of 69,958 patients (mean age 78 years; 48% men) were included.
The incidence of first hospitalization for HF was 0.14% (≥ 55 years, 0.5%; ≥ 90
years, 3.1%). Compared with controls without HF, patients more frequently
presented cardiovascular or other co-morbidities. The hospital mortality rate was
6.4% and the mortality rate during the 30 days after discharge was 4.4% (3.4%
without readmission). Among 30-day survivors, all-cause and HF 30-day readmission
rates were 18% (< 70 years, 22%; ≥ 90 years, 13%) and 5%, respectively.
Reimbursements among 30-day survivors comprised at least a beta-blocker in 54% of
cases, diuretics in 85%, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) in 67%, a diuretic and ACEI/ARB combination 
in 23% and a beta-blocker, ACEI/ARB and diuretic combination in 37%.
CONCLUSION: Patients admitted for HF presented high rates of co-morbidity,
readmission and death at 30 days, and there remains room for improvement in their
drug treatments; these findings indicate the need for improvement in return-home 
and therapeutic education programmes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Med J Aust. 2000 Mar 20;172(6):261-5.

Death and readmission in the year after hospital admission with cardiovascular
disease: the Hunter Area Heart and Stroke Register.

Heller RF(1), Fisher JD, D'Este CA, Lim LL, Dobson AJ, Porter R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Newcastle, NSW. rfhcceb@ibm.net

OBJECTIVES: To compare outcomes one year after hospital admission for patients
initially discharged with a diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction (AMI), other
ischaemic heart disease (other IHD), congestive heart failure (CHF) or stroke.
DESIGN: Cohort study.
SETTING: Hunter Area Heart and Stroke Register, which registers all patients
admitted with heart disease or stroke to any of the 22 hospitals in the Hunter
Area Health Service in New South Wales.
PATIENTS: 4981 patients with AMI, other IHD, CHF or stroke admitted to hospital
as an emergency between 1 July 1995 and 30 June 1997 and followed for at least
one year.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Death from any cause or emergency hospital readmission for
cardiovascular disease.
RESULTS: In-hospital mortality varied from 1% of those with other IHD to 22% of
those with stroke. Almost a third of all patients discharged alive (and 38% of
those aged 70 or more) had died or been readmitted within one year. This varied
from 22% of those with stroke to 49% of those with CHF. The causes of death and
readmission were from a spectrum of cardiovascular disease, regardless of the
cause of the original hospital admission.
CONCLUSIONS: Data from this population register show the poor outcome, especially
with increasing age, among patients admitted to hospital with cardiovascular
disease. This should alert us to determine whether optimal secondary prevention
strategies are being adopted among such patients.

PMID: 10860090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2013 Nov;15(11):1228-35. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hft100. Epub 2013 
Jun 19.

Serum aldosterone is associated with mortality and re-hospitalization in patients
with reduced ejection fraction hospitalized for acute heart failure: analysis
from the EVEREST trial.

Girerd N(1), Pang PS, Swedberg K, Fought A, Kwasny MJ, Subacius H, Konstam MA,
Maggioni A, Gheorghiade M, Zannad F; EVEREST investigators.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Centre d'Investigations Cliniques 9501, Université de Lorraine, CHU de
Nancy, Institut Lorrain du cœur et des vaisseaux, Nancy, France.

AIMS: Post-discharge morbidity and mortality for acute heart failure (AHF)
patients remains high. Although the adverse effects of neurohormonal activation
are well known in chronic HF, the prognostic significance of serum aldosterone in
patients hospitalized for AHF has not been well studied.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A secondary analysis was carried out of the placebo arm (n =
1850) from the EVEREST trial which had aldosterone measured at baseline. All
patients were hospitalized for worsening HF and had an LVEF <40%. The median
follow-up was 9.9 months. The association between serum aldosterone levels at
baseline and the independently adjudicated outcomes [all-cause mortality (ACM)
and the combined outcome of cardiovascular mortality (CVM) and HF
re-hospitalization] were explored with multivariable Cox models. Median
aldosterone levels increased during the hospital stay from 11 ng/dL at baseline
to 15 ng/dL at discharge (P < 0.001) and remained increased after discharge (16
ng/dL at 24 weeks, P < 0.001). After adjusting for potential confounders, higher 
baseline aldosterone levels were associated with an increased risk for ACM and
CVM or HF re-hospitalization [hazard ratio (HR) 1.49, 95% confidence intrerval
(CI) 1.11-1.99; and HR 1.40, 95% CI 1.11-1.78, respectively, in the highest
quartile when compared with the lowest].
CONCLUSION: In patients with LVEF <40% hospitalized for AHF and receiving
standard therapy, serum aldosterone levels correlated with worse post-discharge
outcomes. Aldosterone levels increase during AHF hospitalization and remain
increased long after discharge. These results suggest that further modulation of 
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in patients admitted with worsening HF
might favourably improve post-discharge outcomes.

PMID: 23787720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur Heart J. 2002 Jun;23(11):877-85.

Hospitalization of patients with heart failure: a population-based study.

Cowie MR(1), Fox KF, Wood DA, Metcalfe C, Thompson SG, Coats AJ, Poole-Wilson PA,
Sutton GC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiac Medicine, Imperial College School of Medicine at the National Heart & 
Lung Institute, London, UK.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2002 Jun;23(11):842-5.

AIMS: To describe the clinical course of heart failure in a population-based
sample of incident cases, and to identify factors predicting hospitalization and 
mortality.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Three hundred and thirty-two incident cases were identified 
over 15 months; 208 inpatients and 124 outpatients. Thirty-eight inpatients died 
during the first hospital admission (case fatality 18%) leaving 294 at risk of
subsequent hospitalization. Over an average follow-up of 19 months, 173 cases
were hospitalized on 311 occasions. Two hundred and twenty-four (72%) of these
admissions were unplanned, with 51% due to worsening heart failure. One hundred
and ten cases died over the same period. Cases diagnosed as an inpatient had 26
more admissions for worsening heart failure per 100 cases during follow-up (95%
CI 9 to 44) compared to cases diagnosed as an outpatient, and also a higher
mortality (hazard ratio 3.1 (95% CI 1.9 to 5.1)). Age was the only factor
associated with an increased risk of hospitalization for worsening heart failure,
but age, functional class and serum creatinine were predictive of mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: New cases of heart failure are at high risk of subsequent
hospitalization, especially during the first months after diagnosis. Whilst
predicting which patients will be hospitalized is difficult, interventions
designed to reduce hospitalizations for worsening heart failure should be
targeted at elderly inpatients with a new diagnosis.

Copyright 2001 The European Society of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Science 
Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 12042009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Ital Heart J. 2002 Feb;3(2):96-103.

A population-based study on overt heart failure in Lombardy (survey of
hospitalization in 1996 and 1997).

Gronda E(1), Mangiavacchi M, Andreuzzi B, Municinò A, Bologna A, Schweiger C,
Barbieri P.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cardiology and Heart Failure Unit, Cardiovascular Department,
Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Via Manzoni, 56 20089 Rozzano, MI.
edoardo.gronda@humanitas.it

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to get updated information about the
incidence and outcome of heart failure hospital admission in the whole population
of the largest Italy region.
METHODS: The Lombardy regional database of hospital records (Information System
and Quality Control Bureau) provided the requested information: all the heart
failure cases admitted to all the institutions of the region were selected by the
ICD9 code of congestive heart failure (428-) as the principal or secondary
diagnosis. The available data included: diagnosis and surgical procedures (up to 
four), date of birth, dates of admission and discharge, outcome, DRG code,
discharge unit code, gender. The data so obtained concern the hospital discharges
in 1996 and 1997.
RESULTS: 32,093 cases were selected. The mean ages were 74.1 +/- 11.5 years for
males and 80.6 +/- 10.7 for females in 1996, and 71.8 +/- 11.7 for males and 78.3
+/- 10.6 for females in 1997. Most of the cases were classified as appertaining
to DRG 127--pure heart failure (56.7%). Heart failure associated with myocardial 
infarction accounted for 7.3% of cases. The remaining cases (36.0%) were
classified as appertaining to heterogeneous medical and surgical DRGs. In 1997,
the in-hospital mortality was 14.7% for patients aged > 80 years; 9.7% for
patients aged between 71 and 80 years; 7.4% for patients aged between 61 and 70
years and 6.9% for patients < 61 years of age with the exclusion of pediatric
cases. The in-hospital mortality was different between discharge units: 2.8% of
in-patients discharged from cardiology units, and 10.3% of in-patients discharged
from general medicine units. The readmission rate at 1 month was 5.49% whereas
that within 1 year was 14.3%.
CONCLUSIONS: Heart failure mortality differences between hospital units are not
explained by age and by comorbidity. The readmission rate was lower than in
previous reports.

PMID: 11926018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Herzschrittmacherther Elektrophysiol. 2005 Sep;16(3):176-82.

[Telemonitoring in chronic heart failure patients. Which diagnostic finding
prevents hospital readmission?].

[Article in German]

Zugck C(1), Nelles M, Frankenstein L, Schultz C, Helms T, Korb H, Katus HA,
Remppis A.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Abteilung für Kardiologie, Angiologie und
Pulmonologie, Im Neuenheimer Feld 410, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
Christian_Zugck@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Heart failure exhibits a significant clinical and health economic problem. The
implementation of new therapeutic strategies favorably affecting the course of
disease is still insufficient in day-to-day practice. Thus, the usage of
telemedicine offers a central instrument for service and information, so that an 
optimized therapy can be achieved by consequent surveillance of the patient with 
chronic heart disease. Predefined vital parameters are automatically transmitted 
to the telemedicine center; if individually predefined limits are exceeded,
therapeutic means are immediately initiated. For the patient, the center is
attainable 24 h throughout the year in case he experiences cardio-pulmonary
symptoms. This patient-oriented usage of technology should not replace the
physician-patient relationship, but improves and supports the participation and
self-management of patients. Furthermore, the results show that this technology
can significantly reduce the amount of emergency physician services, hospital
admissions and primary care physician visits, and displays for health economics
purposes a clearly more cost-effective treatment strategy, while allowing for
additional costs inherent to the system. The usage of telemonitoring in chronic
heart failure patients may be a trendsetting form of care, which can be used to
drastically optimize the information and data flow between patient, hospital and 
primary care physician individually and at any time.

PMID: 16177944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Kidney Int. 2009 Oct;76(8):900-6. doi: 10.1038/ki.2009.295. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

The impact of transient and persistent acute kidney injury on long-term outcomes 
after acute myocardial infarction.

Goldberg A(1), Kogan E, Hammerman H, Markiewicz W, Aronson D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Sieff Medical Center, Safed, Israel.

Acute kidney injury is a common complication of acute myocardial infarction and
is generally associated with adverse outcomes. We studied the incidence and
clinical significance of transient versus persistent acute kidney injury in 1957 
patients who survived an ST-elevation acute myocardial infarction. We divided the
patients into 5 groups based on changes in serum creatinine level during
hospitalization. Mild acute kidney injury (creatinine 0.3-0.49 mg/dl above
baseline) occurred in 156 patients and was transient (resolved during their
hospital stay) in 61. Moderate/severe acute kidney injury (creatinine more than
or 0.5 mg/dl above baseline) was found in 138 patients and was transient in 60.
Compared to patients without acute kidney injury, the adjusted hazard ratio for
mortality was 1.2 in patients with mild, transient acute kidney injury and 1.8 in
patients with mild, persistent injury where the creatinine remained elevated.
Patients with persistent moderate/severe acute kidney injury had the highest
mortality (hazard ratio 2.4), whereas patients with transient moderate/severe
injury had an intermediate risk (hazard ratio of 1.7). A similar relationship was
present between acute kidney injury and admissions for heart failure. Our study
shows that dynamic changes in renal function during acute myocardial infarction
are strongly related to long-term mortality and heart failure.

PMID: 19657321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur Heart J. 2001 Jan;22(2):153-64.

Clinical events leading to the progression of heart failure: insights from a
national database of hospital discharges.

Khand AU(1), Gemmell I, Rankin AC, Cleland JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, UK.

AIMS: To describe the sequence of clinically apparent events causing readmission 
and antedating death, subsequent to a first-time hospital admission for heart
failure, in order to give insights into the natural history and mechanisms of
progression of heart failure.
METHODS: A national database of linked hospital discharge and mortality data for 
Scotland (population 5.1 million) was used. Patients with a first-time admission 
to hospital with heart failure in 1992 (index population) were identified and,
using a record linkage system, hospital readmissions and their cause according to
the hospital physician and deaths were recorded over the subsequent 3 years. A
flowchart showing the sequence of events leading to death or recurrent admission 
was constructed.
RESULTS: 12 640 patients had first-time admissions with heart failure in 1992;
their mean age was 74 years and 46.2% were men. A cohort of 2922 (23%) patients
died on their first admission. Among the remaining 9718 patients there were 22
747 readmissions and 4877 deaths over the subsequent 3 years; only 15% had
neither event reported. Nine per cent of patients died without any readmission
and a further 6% without a further readmission for cardiovascular reasons. A
cohort of 5992 (61% of patients at risk) had at least one cardiovascular
readmission and half of these had occurred within 6 months. Heart failure without
a report of any cardiovascular precipitating event was responsible for 37% (2188 
patients) of first cardiovascular readmissions and of these patients
approximately 12% had evidence of renal failure or acute respiratory infection as
possible triggers for readmission. Acute ischaemic events including myocardial
infarction (19%), myocardial infarction alone (8%) and atrial fibrillation (11%) 
were associated with a substantial number of first readmissions. First
readmission precipitated by acute myocardial infarction was associated with a
particularly poor prognosis (40% inpatient mortality).
CONCLUSIONS: Recurrent ischaemic events and atrial fibrillation may be the
predominant mechanisms leading to exacerbation of and progression of heart
failure and death. A substantial proportion of readmissions appear related to
heart failure alone. Whether this reflects progressive ventricular remodelling
leading to worsening heart failure or other unidentified mechanisms cannot be
discerned from this data.

Copyright 2001 The European Society of Cardiology.

PMID: 11161917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Lung Circ. 2013 Mar;22(3):179-83. doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2012.05.008. Epub 2012
Jun 28.

Importance of predictors of rehospitalisation in heart failure: a survey of heart
failure experts.

Betihavas V(1), Newton PJ, Frost SA, Alexandrou E, Macdonald PS, Davidson PM.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Western Sydney, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Australia. 
v.betihavas@curtin.edu.au

AIMS: We investigated the opinion of clinical experts and researchers involved in
chronic heart failure disease management regarding the ranking of patient,
provider and system factors that predict the risk of rehospitalisation.
METHODS: Item generation for the online survey was informed by a literature
review and current risk prediction models. Consultation with experts was
undertaken via a secure online survey platform. Invitations to participate in the
10 question online survey were sent through Listserves of professional nursing
and medical associations within Australia and New Zealand.
RESULTS: Data were collected in August 2011. A total of 119 respondents completed
the survey. Respondents ranged from researchers, registered nurses, cardiologists
and allied health personnel. A mean importance score was used to rank risk
factors for rehospitalisation. Risk factors that scored high for predicting the
risk for rehospitalisation included poor adherence to medications (9.04) and
prior hospitalisation for heart failure (8.33). Having private health insurance
(4.8) and being female (4.9) scored lower in influencing rehospitalisation for
adults with heart failure.
CONCLUSIONS: No new risk factors were identified from the experts in predicting
the risk of rehospitalisation. The survey results will contribute to the
development of a nomogram to convey prognostic information related to adults with
heart failure that will guide clinicians in management decisions.

Copyright © 2012 Australian and New Zealand Society of Cardiac and Thoracic
Surgeons (ANZSCTS) and the Cardiac Society of Australia and New Zealand (CSANZ). 
Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22748633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Lakartidningen. 2012 Nov 28-Dec 4;109(48):2211-5.

[The risk of acute readmission can be predicted. Former care consumption patterns
and certain diagnoses are strongly predictive].

[Article in Swedish]

Stäck P(1), Forsberg B, Högberg M, Werr J, Edgren G.

Author information: 
(1)Health Navigator AB, Stockholm.

PMID: 23330527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Cardiol. 2009 Sep;32(9):E62-5. doi: 10.1002/clc.20513.

Preinfarction angina prior to first myocardial infarction does not influence
long-term prognosis: a retrospective study with subgroup analysis in elderly and 
diabetic patients.

Jiménez-Navarro MF(1), Muñoz-García A, Ramirez-Marrero MA, Dominguez-Franco A,
García Alcántara A, Gómez-Doblas JJ, Alonso-Briales J, Hernández-García JM, Salva
D, Rodriguez-Losada N, de Teresa E.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Victoria,
Campus de Teatinos s/n, Málaga, Spain. jimeneznavarro@secardiologia.es

BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESIS: Although prodromal angina occurring shortly before an 
acute myocardial infarction (MI) has protective effects against in-hospital
complications, this effect has not been well documented after initial
hospitalization, especially in older or diabetic patients. We examined whether
angina 1 week before a first MI provides protection in these patients.
METHODS: A total of 290 consecutive patients, 143 elderly (>64 years of age) and 
147 adults (<65 years of age), 68 of whom were diabetic (23.4%) and 222
nondiabetic (76.6%), were examined to assess the effect of preceding angina on
long-term prognosis (56 months) after initial hospitalization for a first MI.
RESULTS: No significant differences were found in long-term complications after
initial hospitalization in these adult and elderly patients according to whether 
or not they had prodromal angina (44.4% with angina vs 45.4% without in adults;
45.5% vs 58% in elderly, P < 0.2). Nor were differences found according to their 
diabetic status (61.5% with angina vs 72.7% without in diabetics; 37.3% vs 38.3% 
in nondiabetics; P = 0.4).
CONCLUSION: The occurrence of angina 1 week before a first MI does not confer
long-term protection against cardiovascular complications after initial
hospitalization in adult or elderly patients, whether or not they have diabetes.

Copyright 2009 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 19645043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Acta Cardiol. 2014 Apr;69(2):145-54.

Implementation of transmural disease management in patients admitted with
advanced heart failure.

Duchenne J, Verbrugge FH, Dupont M, Vercammen J, Jacobs L, Grieten L, Vandervoort
P, Mullens W.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the feasibility and impact
on readmissions of transmural disease management across the borders of the
cardiology department in patients with advanced heart failure (HF).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Consecutive patients, readmitted within one year for
advanced HF by a dedicated specialist (n = 55), were followed for 22 +/- 10
months after implementation of a hospitalwide transmural disease management
strategy. Participants received a tag in their electronic medical record,
triggering a HF caregiver contact, with subsequent guideline-recommended,
protocol-driven care on each cardiac or non-cardiac hospitalization as well as
outpatient evaluation. Upon transition to outpatient follow-up, patients were
instructed to call the HF caregiver with any question at low threshold.
Readmission rates were prospectively collected. Despite receiving adequate
treatment with neurohumoral blockers, patients (71 +/- 11 years; ejection
fraction 35 +/- 13%) had spent 4% (27%) of the year preceding study inclusion in 
hospital, with 73% admitted once, 20% twice, and 7% more than twice for acute
decompensated HF (ADHF). During the study, patients were exposed to 6 +/- 4
dedicated HF caregiver contacts. Participation in remote device monitoring
increased from 31% to 92%, with 1 (0-3) additional phone contacts per
patient-year of follow-up in this subgroup (n = 24). All-cause mortality and
readmission rates for ADHF were 10% and 25% after one year, and 19% and 39% after
2 years, respectively. Follow-up time spent in hospital decreased significantly
to 2% (16%) (P value = 0.047).
CONCLUSIONS: Follow-up of advanced HF patients through transmural disease
management is feasible and associated with favourable clinical outcome.

PMID: 24783465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Int J Cardiol. 2006 Apr 28;109(1):108-13. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Predicting readmissions and cardiovascular events in heart failure patients.

Mejhert M(1), Kahan T, Persson H, Edner M.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet Danderyd Hospital, Division of Internal Medicine,
Stockholm, Sweden. marit.mejhert@ersta.se

AIMS: To analyse measures of clinical data, functional capacity, left ventricular
function and neurohormonal activation for the ability to predict mortality and
morbidity in patients after a hospitalisation for heart failure.
METHODS: In a prospective study, patients 60 years or above with systolic heart
failure NYHA II-IV were followed for at least 18 months. At study start, a
physical examination, echocardiography, blood samples and measurements of quality
of life (QoL) by Nottingham Health Profile were obtained. Data on mortality and
readmission rates were collected.
RESULTS: 208 patients, 58% men, with a mean age of 76 years, and an ejection
fraction of 0.34 were included and followed for a mean of 1,122 days. In all, 74 
(36%) patients died and 171 (82%) were readmitted. By univariate analysis,
readmissions were predicted by poor QoL (169 +/- 118 vs. 83 +/- 100, p < 0.001), 
age, creatinine, haemoglobin (p < 0.01 all) and diabetes (p < 0.1). By
multivariate analyses, QoL at study start was the only independent predictor of
readmissions (chi(2) = 25.2, p < 0. 001). Mortality was univariately associated
with QoL (183 +/- 117 vs. 142 +/- 115, p < 0.05) and in multivariate analyses to 
traditional variables: age, male gender, systolic function, BNP and serum
creatinine (chi(2) = 48.9, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Measurements representing different aspects of the heart failure
syndrome can easily be obtained to stratify long-term risks of mortality and
morbidity in hospitalised heart failure patients. Poor QoL was a univariate
predictor for mortality and a strong multivariate predictor for the important
outcome of readmission, pointing to the need for a simple assessment of QoL.

PMID: 16213040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Congest Heart Fail. 2010 Sep-Oct;16(5):208-13. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-7133.2010.00151.x.

The 6-minute walk is associated with frailty and predicts mortality in older
adults with heart failure.

Boxer R(1), Kleppinger A, Ahmad A, Annis K, Hager D, Kenny A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harrington McLaughlin Heart and Vascular Institute,
University Hospitals ⁄ Case Medical Center, 11100 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH
44106, USA. rebecca.boxer@case.edu

Heart failure (HF) may contribute to the development of functional decline and
frailty in older adults. Sixty HF patients with an ejection fraction ≤ 40%
evaluated in 2004 and 2005 were reevaluated in 2008. Six-minute walk distance
(6MW), frailty score, and biomarkers (25-hydroxyvitamin D, C-reactive protein,
and interleukin-6 [IL-6]) were measured. Participants were categorized at
baseline and follow-up into 3 groups: nonfrail/normal endurance (NF/NE),
nonfrail/low endurance (NF/LE) and frail/low endurance (F/LE). Survival time was 
assessed according to frailty/endurance status and associated predictors of
mortality. Forty-three men, 17 women (mean age, 78 ± 12 years) were contacted. At
follow-up, 20 had died, 20 participated, and 20 did not participate. There were
no changes in frailty/endurance status over time (McNemar;P=.19). Deaths occurred
in 18% of NF/NE, 45% of NF/LE, and 60% of F/LE persons. The NF/NE group had
greater survival rates than the NF/LE (  P=.032) and F/LE (  P=.014) groups. The 
6MW and frailty score were independently predictive of mortality, with hazard
ratios of 0.82 (95% confidence interval, 0.72-0.94) and 1.64 (95% confidence
interval, 1.19-2.26), respectively, as was New York Heart Association class and
IL-6. Backward stepwise Cox regression revealed that 6MW and frailty each were
associated with mortality (P=.005) and highly correlated. Physical function is an
important predictor of mortality in older adults with HF. The 6MW may be useful
as a measure of frailty.

© 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3027222
PMID: 20887617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2012 Mar 1;5(2):160-6. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.963561.
Epub 2012 Jan 13.

Acculturation and outcomes among patients with heart failure.

Peterson PN(1), Campagna EJ, Maravi M, Allen LA, Bull S, Steiner JF, Havranek EP,
Dickinson LM, Masoudi FA.

Author information: 
(1)Denver Health Medical Center, Denver, CO, USA. Pamela.Peterson@ucdenver.edu

BACKGROUND: Acculturation to US society among minority patients may-beyond race
and ethnicity alone-influence health outcomes beyond race and ethnicity alone. In
particular, those who are foreign-born and who do not speak English as their
primary language may have greater challenges interacting with the health care
system and thus be at greater risk for adverse outcomes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied patients hospitalized with a principal discharge 
diagnosis of heart failure between January 2000 and December 2007 in an
integrated delivery system that cares for minority patients. Individuals were
defined as having low acculturation if their primary language was not English and
their country of birth was outside of the United States. Multivariable logistic
regression and Cox proportional hazards regression were used to determine the
independent risk of 30-day rehospitalization and 1-year mortality, respectively. 
Candidate adjustment variables included demographics (age, sex, race/ethnicity), 
coexisting illnesses, laboratory values, left ventricular systolic function, and 
characteristics of the index admission. Of 1268 patients, 30% (n=379) were black,
39% (n=498) were Hispanic, and 27% (n=348) were white. Eighteen percent (n=228)
had low acculturation. After adjustment, low acculturation was associated with a 
higher risk of readmission at 30 days (odds ratio, 1.70; 95% confidence interval,
1.07-2.68) but not 1-year all-cause mortality (hazard ratio, 0.69; 95% confidence
interval, 0.42-1.14).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with heart failure who are foreign-born and do not speak
English as their primary language have a greater risk of rehospitalization,
independent of clinical factors and race/ethnicity. Future studies should
evaluate whether culturally concordant interventions focusing on such patients
may improve outcomes for this patient population.

PMCID: PMC3786352
PMID: 22247483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2001 Jan 15;87(2):234-7, A9.

Simple clinical variables are markers of the propensity for readmission in
patients hospitalized with heart failure.

Harjai KJ(1), Thompson HW, Turgut T, Shah M.

Author information: 
(1)Ochsner Medical Institutions, and Louisiana State University Medical Center,
New Orleans, USA. kharjai@ochsner.org

In a consecutive cohort of patients hospitalized for decompensated heart failure,
we found that chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and history of
hospitalization for any cause in the preceding 6 months were the strongest
correlates of early readmission. Based on these findings, we propose a simple
risk stratification system to classify patients who are hospitalized for heart
failure as low, medium, or high risk for early readmission.

PMID: 11152851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2014 Dec 5;16:93. doi: 10.1186/s12968-014-0093-x.

The role of cardiovascular magnetic resonance in stratifying paravalvular leak
severity after transcatheter aortic valve replacement: an observational outcome
study.

Hartlage GR, Babaliaros VC, Thourani VH, Hayek S, Chrysohoou C, Ghasemzadeh N,
Stillman AE, Clements SD, Oshinski JN, Lerakis S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Structural Heart and Valve
Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia. sleraki@emory.edu.

BACKGROUND: Significant paravalvular leak (PVL) after transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement (TAVR) confers a worse prognosis. Symptoms related to significant PVL
may be difficult to differentiate from those related to other causes of heart
failure. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) directly quantifies valvular
regurgitation, but has not been extensively studied in symptomatic post-TAVR
patients.
METHODS: CMR was compared to qualitative (QE) and semi-quantitative
echocardiography (SQE) for classifying PVL and prognostic value at one year
post-imaging in 23 symptomatic post-TAVR patients. The primary outcome was a
composite of all-cause death, heart failure hospitalization, and intractable
symptoms necessitating repeat invasive therapy; the secondary outcome was a
composite of all-cause death and heart failure hospitalization. The difference in
event-free survival according to greater than mild PVL versus mild or less PVL by
QE, SQE, and CMR were evaluated by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis.
RESULTS: Compared to QE, CMR reclassified PVL severity in 48% of patients, with
most patients (31%) reclassified to at least one grade higher. Compared to SQE,
CMR reclassified PVL severity in 57% of patients, all being reclassified to at
least one grade lower; SQE overestimated PVL severity (mean grade 2.5 versus 1.7,
p=0.001). The primary and secondary outcomes occurred in 48% and 35% of patients,
respectively. Greater than mild PVL by CMR was associated with reduced event-free
survival for the primary outcome (p<0.0001), however greater than mild PVL by QE 
and SQE were not (p=0.83 and p=0.068). Greater than mild PVL by CMR was
associated with reduced event-free survival for the secondary outcome, as well
(p=0.012).
CONCLUSION: In symptomatic post-TAVR patients, CMR commonly reclassifies PVL
grade compared with QE and SQE. CMR provides superior prognostic value compared
to QE and SQE, as patients with greater than mild PVL by CMR (RF>20%) had a
higher incidence of adverse events.

PMCID: PMC4256820
PMID: 25475485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 1997 Jul;11(4):75-84.

Factors contributing to rehospitalization of elderly patients with heart failure.

Happ MB(1), Naylor MD, Roe-Prior P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

This article describes factors contributing to rehospitalizations of elderly
patients with heart failure. Advanced practice nurses' logs, study
questionnaires, and medical record summaries from a recent clinical trial
provided rich, descriptive information about a variety of social and behavioral
factors surrounding rehospitalization in these medically fragile older people.
Medication and dietary nonadherence were factors affecting symptom appearance and
rehospitalization. Social and behavioral factors, such as the absence of strong
social support or motivation, contributed to nonadherence. These results suggest 
that social and behavioral factors must be identified and addressed in an
individualized manner to prevent recurrent hospitalizations for elderly patients 
with heart failure.

PMID: 9200021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Emerg Med. 2010 Aug;17(4):197-202. doi: 10.1097/MEJ.0b013e32832f7666.

Predicting the risk of reattendance for acute heart failure patients discharged
from Spanish Emergency Department observation units.

Miró O(1), Llorens P, Martín-Sánchez FJ, Herrero P, Jacob J, Pérez-Durá MJ,
González C, Alonso H, Gil V, Alvarez AB, Perelló R, González-Armengol JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Department, Hospital Clinic, Villarroel 170, 08036 Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain. omiro@clinic.ub.es

BACKGROUND: Patients with acute heart failure (AHF) are frequently evaluated in
the Emergency Departments (ED) and discharged from their observation units (OU)
without hospital admission. We examined direct discharge rates from the ED OU,
risk factors for returning to the ED, and returning and mortality rates.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This prospective, longitudinal, noninterventional,
population-based cohort study included all the patients with AHF consecutively
attended in seven Spanish EDs who were directly discharged without hospital
admission. Reattendance (dependent variable) was accepted if occurred during the 
next 30 days after discharge. Twenty-nine independent variables were recorded,
covering epidemiological, clinical, and functional data.
RESULTS: Two hundred and fifty-nine of 740 patients (35%) diagnosed with AHF were
entirely managed in the ED OU and discharged home (mean stay: 18.8 h); 26.7% of
them were reattended. Only three variables were independently associated with the
chance of reattendance: functional impairment predicted adverse outcomes [odds
ratio (OR): 4.0, 95% confidence interval (95% CI): 1.7-9.1], while past history
of hypertension and a systolic blood pressure greater than 160 mmHg at ED arrival
decreased the risk of ED return (OR: 0.4, 95% CI: 0.2-0.9; and OR: 0.3; 95% CI:
0.1-0.9; respectively). An overall mortality of 4.7% was recorded during the next
30 days.
CONCLUSION: One-third of the patients consulting at the ED for an episode of AHF 
can be directly discharged from the OU of ED, with relatively low rates of
reattendance (26.7%) and mortality (4.7%). Emergency physicians should be
especially cautious discharging patients with functional dependence because they 
are at increased risk of returning.

PMID: 20215973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Card Fail. 2008 Apr;14(3):219-24. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2007.10.009.

B-type natriuretic Peptide-guided treatment for predicting outcome in patients
hospitalized in sub-intensive care unit with acute heart failure.

Valle R(1), Aspromonte N, Giovinazzo P, Carbonieri E, Chiatto M, di Tano G, Feola
M, Milli M, Fontebasso A, Barro S, Bardellotto S, Milani L.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Unit, Department of Cardiology, Ospedale Civile, S. Donà di
Piave - Venice.

BACKGROUND: Studies with natriuretic peptides have suggested that physicians do
not treat heart acute failure (AHF) aggressively enough, and predischarge B-type 
natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels may be a useful reminder that more treatment is 
required. The purpose of this study was to demonstrate that variations in BNP
levels during hormone-guided treatment and measured body hydration status enable 
the timing of the patient's discharge to be optimized.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We retrospectively evaluated 186 patients admitted for AHF. 
All subjects underwent serial bioelectrical impedance analysis and BNP
measurement. Therapy was titrated according to BNP value to reach a BNP value of 
<250 pg/mL, whenever is possible. A BNP value on discharge of <250 pg/mL
(obtained in 54% of the patients) predicted a 16% event rate within 6 months,
whereas a value >250 pg/mL was associated with a far higher percentage (78%) of
adverse events. Among the former, no significant differences in event rate were
seen in relation to the time necessary to obtain a reduction in BNP values below 
250 pg/mL (14 versus 18%, chi-square = 0.3, NS). Cox regression showed that a BNP
cutoff value of 250 pg/mL is the most accurate predictors of events.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates the usefulness of BNP in intrahospital
stratification of AHF, in the decision-making process, and as a tool for
"tailored therapy." Integrating this approach into the routine assessment of HF
patients would allow clinicians to more accurately identify high-risk patients,
who may derive increased benefit from intensive in-hospital management
strategies.

PMID: 18381185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Telemed Telecare. 2013 Feb;19(2):107-12. doi: 10.1258/jtt.2012.120509. Epub
2013 Mar 25.

Use of a homecare electronic health record to find associations between patient
characteristics and re-hospitalizations in patients with heart failure using
telehealth.

Radhakrishnan K(1), Jacelon CS, Bigelow C, Roche J, Marquard J, Bowles KH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78701-1499, USA.
kradhakrishnan@mail.nur.utexas.edu

Data from homecare electronic health records were used to explore the association
of patient characteristics with re-hospitalizations of patients with heart
failure (HF) during a 60-day period of telemonitoring following hospital
discharge. Data from 403 Medicare patients with HF who had used telehealth from
2008 to 2010 were analysed. There were 112 all-cause (29%) and 73 cardiac-related
(19%) re-hospitalizations within 60 days of the start of telemonitoring. In
adjusted analyses, the patients' number of medications and type of cardiac
medications were significantly (P < 0.05) associated with an increased risk of
re-hospitalization. After stratifying the sample by illness severity, age and
gender, other significant (P < 0.05) predictors associated with an increased risk
of all-cause and cardiac re-hospitalization were psychiatric co-morbidity,
pulmonary and obesity co-morbidities within gender, beta blocker prescription in 
females and primary HF diagnosis in the oldest age stratum. The study's findings 
may assist homecare agencies seeking to allocate resources without compromising
patient care.

PMID: 23528787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2008 Jul-Aug;23(4):349-56. doi:
10.1097/01.JCN.0000317434.29339.14.

Does oxygen saturation or distance walked predict rehospitalization in heart
failure?

Howie-Esquivel J(1), Dracup K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Nursing, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. jill.howie-esquivel@nursing.ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: Hospitalized heart failure (HF) patients experience high
rehospitalization rates. Predicting early rehospitalization risk in HF patients
may enable better decision making at time of hospital discharge. It is known that
sex and ethnicity influence rehospitalization rates. Several measures easily and 
conveniently obtained before discharge are arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) and 
distance walked during the 6-minute walk test (6MWT).
RESEARCH OBJECTIVE: The aim of this pilot study was to examine sociodemographic
(sex and ethnicity) and clinical (oxygenation and distance walked) variables
obtained during a predischarge 6MWT that could indicate increased risk of cardiac
rehospitalization within 90 days.
METHODS: Within 24 hours of discharge, 44 hospitalized HF patients underwent 6MWT
with continuous SaO2 and heart rate monitoring. Demographic data, past medical
history, and medication use were collected from the patients' charts.
RESULTS: Participants' mean (SD) age was 59.6 (18.6) years, with half (n = 22)
being Caucasian/white and one-quarter (n = 11) being married. Half (n = 22) were 
anemic on admission. Mean (SD) SaO2 was 94.2% (3.6%), mean (SD) minimum SaO2 was 
89.1% (6.1%), and mean (SD) 6MWT was 220.8 (111.6) m. More than half (n = 23)
were rehospitalized for cardiac reasons. Women had a 2.5 times greater risk of
rehospitalization than men did. Women were significantly more anemic and walked
shorter distances. There was no relation between distance walked or SaO2 and
rehospitalization risk.
CONCLUSION: Although there was no relation between SaO2 and rehospitalization
risk, women had a greater risk of rehospitalization, were more frail, and were
more often anemic. This study is novel because it establishes a link between sex,
anemia, functional status, and rehospitalization risk in patients hospitalized
for HF. More research is needed to better understand the influence of anemia,
functional status, and sex in relation to rehospitalization risk.

PMID: 18596499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2003 May;23(5):748-54; discussion 754-5.

The Jarvik 2000 is associated with less infections than the HeartMate left
ventricular assist device.

Siegenthaler MP(1), Martin J, Pernice K, Doenst T, Sorg S, Trummer G,
Friesewinkel O, Beyersdorf F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Albert-Ludwigs University Freiburg,
Germany. siegenth@ch11.ukl.uni-freiburg.de

OBJECTIVES: Device-related infections remain a considerable problem of
left-ventricular support. We compared the device-related-infections between the
HeartMate left ventricular assist device (LVAD) and the Jarvik 2000 permanent
LVAD, a device with a novel retroauricular power-supply.
METHODS: Between December 2000 and September 2002 we implanted the
HeartMate-vented, electrical-system in 11 patients and the permanent Jarvik 2000 
in six patients. Total support time was 1626 patient-days (HeartMate, 26-271
days) versus 1246 patient-days (Jarvik 2000, 8-411 days). As potential risk
factors for infection we analyzed age, preoperative hospital-days, total protein,
cardiac index, maximal oxygen uptake, use of inotropes, LVAD risk-score-index and
Aaronson-Mancini-score, intubation time, and intensive care unit stay. We used
the Center of Disease Control definitions for surgical site infections.
RESULTS: HeartMate-patients were younger than Jarvik 2000 patients (46+/-13
versus 58+/-6 years, P=0.056), there were no other differences in the risk
factors. Four HeartMate-patients needed late (>or=48 h) surgical revisions for
bleeding/hematomas versus no revisions in the Jarvik 2000 patients. In the
HeartMate-patients, there were seven (64%) driveline-infections, five (45%)
device-pocket infections, and three (27%) bloodstream-infections, or 0.43
device-related infections/100 patient-days. Infections occurred early (34+/-31
days). Three patients required urgent transplantation due to bloodstream
infection. There were no adverse outcomes in the HeartMate-group due to
infection. In the Jarvik 2000 patients, there was one driveline-infection (16%)
after 270 days of support (0.08 device-related infections/100 patient-days),
significantly less than in the HeartMate-group (P=0.044). Driveline infections
resolved with antibiotics and local wound care in the Jarvik 2000 patient, but
only in one of seven HeartMate-patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Implantation of the Jarvik 2000 is associated with less
device-related infections than the HeartMate-LVAD. The power-supply of the
permanent Jarvik 2000 is suitable for long-term mechanical support.

PMID: 12754028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2014 Jan;15(1):33-41. doi:
10.2459/JCM.0b013e328364100b.

Plasma cortisol and prognosis of patients with acute myocardial infarction.

Jutla SK(1), Yuyun MF, Quinn PA, Ng LL.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester bNIHR
Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester,
UK *Sandeep K. Jutla and Matthew F. Yuyun contributed equally to the writing of
the article.

AIMS: Cortisol is associated with increased cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality in patients with chronic heart failure and in the general population.
The negative predictive effect of cortisol on survival in non-diabetic patients
who have suffered an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) has been shown. We aimed
to determine the prognostic significance of cortisol in a general group of AMI
patients, as this is not well known.
METHODS: Plasma cortisol levels were measured in 955 consecutive patients
admitted with AMI. We prospectively evaluated the relationship between cortisol
and major adverse cardiovascular event (MACE), which was a composite of all-cause
mortality, and combination all-cause mortality and re-hospitalization for heart
failure, in post-AMI patients.
RESULTS: During the 2-year follow-up, MACE occurred in 261 patients (27.3%).
Patients with MACE had significantly higher median levels of cortisol than those 
without (609.4 versus 549.4 pmol/ml, P = 0.0073). Log cortisol was independently 
predictive of MACE after adjusting for covariates with hazard ratio (95%
confidence interval) of 1.55 (1.05-2.27), P = 0.027. Patients in the highest
quartile of cortisol had significantly more risk of MACE compared with those in
the lowest quartile, with an adjusted hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) of
1.91(1.16-3.15), P = 0.0120. Kaplan-Meier survival estimates for MACE were lower 
in patients with plasma cortisol levels in the highest quartile compared with
those in the first three quartiles (Log rank test χ² for survival = 10.41,
P = 0.0013).
CONCLUSION: This study has shown the prognostic significance of cortisol in 955
post-AMI patients from a single centre.

PMID: 24500236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Res. 2015 Apr 10;116(8):1361-77. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.304386. Epub
2015 Jan 28.

Meta-analysis of cell therapy trials for patients with heart failure.

Fisher SA(1), Doree C(1), Mathur A(1), Martin-Rendon E(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Systematic Review Group, R&D Department, NHS Blood and Transplant,
Oxford, UK (S.A.F., C.D.); Nuffield Division of Clinical Laboratory Sciences,
Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK (S.A.F., C.D.,
E.M.-R.); Department of Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK (A.M.); and Stem Cell Research
Laboratory, R&D Department, NHS Blood and Transplant, Oxford, UK (E.M.-R.).
(2)From the Systematic Review Group, R&D Department, NHS Blood and Transplant,
Oxford, UK (S.A.F., C.D.); Nuffield Division of Clinical Laboratory Sciences,
Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK (S.A.F., C.D.,
E.M.-R.); Department of Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK (A.M.); and Stem Cell Research
Laboratory, R&D Department, NHS Blood and Transplant, Oxford, UK (E.M.-R.).
enca.rendon@ndcls.ox.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Apr 10;116(8):1291-2.

RATIONALE: Cell-based therapies are a promising intervention for the treatment of
heart failure (HF) secondary to ischemic and nonischemic cardiomyopathy. However,
the clinical efficacy of such new treatment requires further evaluation.
OBJECTIVE: To assess available clinical evidence on the safety and efficacy of
cell-based therapies for HF.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Electronic databases (CENTRAL, DARE, NHSEED & HTA, PubMed,
MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, LILACS, KoreaMed, PakMediNet, IndMed, and the
Transfusion Evidence Library) were searched for relevant randomized controlled
trials to June 2014. Trials of participants with HF and where the administration 
of any dose of autologous cells by any delivery route was compared with no
intervention or placebo were eligible for inclusion. Primary outcomes were
defined as mortality and rehospitalization as a result of HF. Secondary outcomes 
included performance status, quality of life, incidence of arrhythmias, brain
natriuretic peptide levels, left ventricular ejection fraction, myocardial
perfusion, and adverse events. Thirty-one independent trials (1521 participants) 
were included. The treatment significantly reduced the risk of mortality and
rehospitalization caused by HF. There was a significant improvement in favor of
stem cell treatment in performance status and exercise capacity, left ventricular
ejection fraction, and quality of life. The treatment was also associated with a 
reduction of brain natriuretic peptide levels and no increase in the incidence of
arrhythmias. However, there was considerable risk of performance, selection, and 
reporting bias among the included trials.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows evidence that autologous cell therapy may be
beneficial for patients having HF, but further evidence is required.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25632038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2014 Jul 1;114(1):79-82. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.03.062. Epub
2014 Apr 18.

Spironolactone use and higher hospital readmission for Medicare beneficiaries
with heart failure, left ventricular ejection fraction <45%, and estimated
glomerular filtration rate <45 ml/min/1.73 m(2.).

Inampudi C(1), Parvataneni S(2), Morgan CJ(2), Deedwania P(3), Fonarow GC(4),
Sanders PW(5), Prabhu SD(5), Butler J(6), Forman DE(7), Aronow WS(8), Allman
RM(9), Ahmed A(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa. Electronic address:
chakradhari-inampudi@uiowa.edu. (2)University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama. (3)University of California, San Francisco, Fresno,
California. (4)University of California, Los Angeles, California. (5)University
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama; Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Birmingham, Alabama. (6)Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia. (7)Harvard
University, Boston, Massachusetts. (8)New York Medical College, Valhalla, New
York. (9)Department of Veterans Affairs, Geriatrics and Extended Care Services,
Washington, District of Columbia.

Comment in
    Am J Cardiol. 2015 Jan 1;115(1):156.
    Am J Cardiol. 2015 Jan 1;115(1):155-6.

Although randomized controlled trials have demonstrated benefits of aldosterone
antagonists for patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction
(HFrEF), they excluded patients with serum creatinine >2.5 mg/dl, and their use
is contraindicated in those with advanced chronic kidney disease (CKD). In the
present analysis, we examined the association of spironolactone use with
readmission in hospitalized Medicare beneficiaries with HFrEF and advanced CKD.
Of the 1,140 patients with HFrEF (EF <45%) and advanced CKD (estimated glomerular
filtration rate [eGFR] <45 ml/min/1.73 m(2)), 207 received discharge
prescriptions for spironolactone. Using propensity scores (PSs) for the receipt
of discharge prescriptions for spironolactone, we estimated PS-adjusted hazard
ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for spironolactone-associated
outcomes. Patients (mean age 76 years, 49% women, 25% African-American) had mean 
EF 28%, mean eGFR 31 ml/min/1.73 m(2), and mean potassium 4.5 mEq/L.
Spironolactone use had significant PS-adjusted association with higher risk of
30-day (HR 1.41, 95% CI 1.04 to 1.90) and 1-year (HR 1.36, 95% CI 1.13 to 1.63)
all-cause readmissions. The risk of 1-year all-cause readmission was higher among
106 patients with eGFR <15 ml/min/1.73 m(2) (HR 4.75, 95% CI 1.84 to 12.28) than 
among those with eGFR 15 to 45 ml/min/1.73 m(2) (HR 1.34, 95% CI 1.11 to 1.61, p 
for interaction 0.003). Spironolactone use had no association with HF readmission
and all-cause mortality. In conclusion, among hospitalized patients with HFrEF
and advanced CKD, spironolactone use was associated with higher all-cause
readmission but had no association with all-cause mortality or HF readmission.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4169696
PMID: 24846806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Card Fail. 2011 Jan;17(1):54-75. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2010.08.010.

Hospitalization epidemic in patients with heart failure: risk factors, risk
prediction, knowledge gaps, and future directions.

Giamouzis G(1), Kalogeropoulos A, Georgiopoulou V, Laskar S, Smith AL, Dunbar S, 
Triposkiadis F, Butler J.

Author information: 
(1)Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Patients with heart failure (HF) are hospitalized over a million times annually
in the United States. Hospitalization marks a fundamental change in the natural
history of HF, leading to frequent subsequent rehospitalizations and a
significantly higher mortality compared with nonhospitalized patients.
Three-fourths of all HF hospitalizations are due to exacerbation of symptoms in
patients with known HF. One-half of hospitalized HF patients experience
readmission within 6 months. Preventing HF hospitalization and rehospitalization 
is important to improve patient outcomes and curb health care costs. To implement
cost-effective strategies to contain the HF hospitalization epidemic, optimal
schemes to identify high-risk individuals are needed. In this review, we describe
the risk factors that have been associated with hospitalization risk in HF and
the various multimarker risk prediction schemes developed to predict HF
rehospitalization. We comment on areas that represent gaps in our knowledge or
difficulties in interpretation of the current literature, representing
opportunities for future research. We also discuss issues with using HF
readmission rate as a quality indicator.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21187265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am Heart J. 2011 Aug;162(2):254-261.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2011.05.009. Epub 2011
Jul 18.

Readmission rates for Hispanic Medicare beneficiaries with heart failure and
acute myocardial infarction.

Rodriguez F(1), Joynt KE, López L, Saldaña F, Jha AK.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hispanics are the fastest growing segment of the US population and
have a higher prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors than non-Hispanic whites.
However, little is known about whether elderly Hispanics have higher readmission 
rates for heart failure (HF) and acute myocardial infarction (AMI) than whites
and whether this is due to site of care.
METHODS: We examined hospitalizations for Medicare patients with a primary
discharge diagnosis of HF and AMI in 2006 to 2008. We categorized hospitals in
the top decile of proportion of Hispanic patients as "Hispanic serving" and used 
logistic regression to examine the relationship between patient ethnicity,
hospital Hispanic-serving status, and readmissions.
RESULTS: Hispanic patients had higher risk-adjusted readmission rates than whites
for both HF (27.9% vs 25.9%, odds ratio [OR] 1.11, 95% CI 1.07-1.14, P < .001)
and AMI (23.0% vs 21.0%, OR 1.12, 95% CI 1.07-1.18, P < .001). Similarly,
Hispanic-serving hospitals had higher readmission rates than non-Hispanic-serving
hospitals for both HF (27.4% vs 25.8%, OR 1.09, 95% CI 1.06-1.12, P < .001) and
AMI (23.0% vs 20.8%, OR 1.13, 95% CI 1.09-1.18, P < .001). In analyses
considering ethnicity and site of care simultaneously, both Hispanics and whites 
had higher readmission rates at Hispanic-serving hospitals.
CONCLUSIONS: Elderly Hispanic patients are more likely to be readmitted for HF
and AMI than whites, partly due to the hospitals where they receive care. Our
findings suggest that targeting the site of care and these high-risk patients
themselves will be necessary to reduce disparities in readmissions for this
growing group of patients.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21835285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JAMA. 2013 Aug 14;310(6):617-26. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.8641.

QRS duration, bundle-branch block morphology, and outcomes among older patients
with heart failure receiving cardiac resynchronization therapy.

Peterson PN(1), Greiner MA, Qualls LG, Al-Khatib SM, Curtis JP, Fonarow GC,
Hammill SC, Heidenreich PA, Hammill BG, Piccini JP, Hernandez AF, Curtis LH,
Masoudi FA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Denver Health Medical Center, 
Denver, CO 80204, USA. pamela.peterson@ucdenver.edu

IMPORTANCE: The benefits of cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) in clinical
trials were greater among patients with left bundle-branch block (LBBB) or longer
QRS duration.
OBJECTIVE: To measure associations between QRS duration and morphology and
outcomes among patients receiving a CRT defibrillator (CRT-D) in clinical
practice.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Retrospective cohort study of Medicare
beneficiaries in the National Cardiovascular Data Registry's ICD Registry between
2006 and 2009 who underwent CRT-D implantation. Patients were stratified
according to whether they were admitted for CRT-D implantation or for another
reason, then categorized as having either LBBB or no LBBB and QRS duration of
either 150 ms or greater or 120 to 149 ms.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: All-cause mortality; all-cause, cardiovascular, and
heart failure readmission; and complications. Patients underwent follow-up for up
to 3 years, with follow-up through December 2011.
RESULTS: Among 24 169 patients admitted for CRT-D implantation, 1-year and 3-year
mortality rates were 9.2% and 25.9%, respectively. All-cause readmission rates
were 10.2% at 30 days and 43.3% at 1 year. Both the unadjusted rate and adjusted 
risk of 3-year mortality were lowest among patients with LBBB and QRS duration of
150 ms or greater (20.9%), compared with LBBB and QRS duration of 120 to 149 ms
(26.5%; adjusted hazard ratio [HR], 1.30 [99% CI, 1.18-1.42]), no LBBB and QRS
duration of 150 ms or greater (30.7%; HR, 1.34 [99% CI, 1.20-1.49]), and no LBBB 
and QRS duration of 120 to 149 ms (32.3%; HR, 1.52 [99% CI, 1.38-1.67]). The
unadjusted rate and adjusted risk of 1-year all-cause readmission were also
lowest among patients with LBBB and QRS duration of 150 ms or greater (38.6%),
compared with LBBB and QRS duration of 120 to 149 ms (44.8%; adjusted HR, 1.18
[99% CI, 1.10-1.26]), no LBBB and QRS duration of 150 ms or greater (45.7%; HR,
1.16 [99% CI, 1.08-1.26]), and no LBBB and QRS duration of 120 to 149 ms (49.6%; 
HR, 1.31 [99% CI, 1.23-1.40]). There were no observed associations with
complications.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries
undergoing CRT-D implantation in clinical practice, LBBB and QRS duration of 150 
ms or greater, compared with LBBB and QRS duration less than 150 ms or no LBBB
regardless of QRS duration, was associated with lower risk of all-cause mortality
and of all-cause, cardiovascular, and heart failure readmissions.

PMID: 23942680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2014 Jun;11(2):178-87. doi: 10.1007/s11897-014-0192-x.

Interventions for heart failure readmissions: successes and failures.

Fleming LM(1), Kociol RD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Harvard Medical School, 185 Pilgrim Rd, Boston, MA, 02215, USA,
lmflemin@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Heart failure readmissions result in significant costs to the health care system 
and to patients' quality of life, but programs to reduce readmissions have met
with mixed success. Successful strategies have included multidisciplinary
hospital-based quality initiatives, disease management programs, and care
transition interventions. Devices like telemonitors and indwelling catheters,
however, have met with mixed success. Research is still needed to elucidate the
most effective interventions for readmission reduction in the HF population.

PMID: 24578234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2009 Oct;8(4):251-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcnurse.2009.05.001. 
Epub 2009 Jun 17.

Perceived loneliness and social support in patients with chronic heart failure.

Löfvenmark C(1), Mattiasson AC, Billing E, Edner M.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Clinical Sciences, Danderyd Hospital,
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden.
caroline.lofvenmark@shh.se

Self-reported conditions have become increasingly important in patient care, and 
perceived loneliness and social relationships in patients with chronic heart
failure (CHF) are not sufficiently investigated.AIM: The aim was to investigate
perceived loneliness and social support in patients with CHF. Further, to
investigate whether loneliness and social support might be associated with
gender, age, healthcare utilization and mortality.
METHODS: One hundred and forty nine patients with CHF, hospitalised at least once
during a 4-month period in 2006, completed a self-reported questionnaire
including measurements about loneliness and social support. Healthcare
utilization was assessed prospectively by frequency of readmissions and number of
days hospitalised during 1 year.
RESULTS: Loneliness was reported by 29 (20%) participants. They were more often
women (p<0.001) and younger (p=0.024). Patients who perceived loneliness had
fewer social contacts (p=0.033), reported lower occurrence of emotional contacts 
(p=0.004), were less satisfied with social contacts and close relationships
(p<0.001). Those reporting loneliness had more days hospitalised (p=0.044), and
more readmissions to hospital (p=0.027), despite not having more severe CHF.
CONCLUSION: Loneliness is a health-related risk indicator in that patients with
CHF who perceived loneliness have more healthcare utilization than those who do
not report loneliness despite not having more severe CHF.

PMID: 19539533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ J. 2009 Sep;73(9):1669-73. Epub 2009 Jul 13.

Prognostic significance of cystatin C in patients with ST-elevation myocardial
infarction.

Ichimoto E(1), Jo K, Kobayashi Y, Inoue T, Nakamura Y, Kuroda N, Miyazaki A,
Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Science and Medicine, Chiba University Graduate
School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan. e.ichimoto@nifty.com

Comment in
    Circ J. 2009 Sep;73(9):1593-4.

BACKGROUND: Cystatin C is reportedly a better endogenous marker of glomerular
filtration rate than serum creatinine, so the prognostic value of cystatin C in
patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (MI) was evaluated in the
present study.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 71 patients who underwent percutaneous coronary
intervention for ST-segment elevation MI <24 h from symptom onset were included. 
According to cystatin C level, patients were classified into 2 groups: (1) higher
cystatin C group (n=33) and (2) lower cystatin C group (n=38). There was a trend 
toward more in-hospital deaths in patients with the higher cystatin C level
compared with the lower cystatin C level group (15.2% vs 2.6%, P=0.06). Mean
duration of clinical follow-up was 5.6 +/-2.8 months. There was no significant
difference in death, reinfarction, disabling stroke or target lesion
revascularization between the 2 groups. However, a higher incidence of
rehospitalization for congestive heart failure was observed in patients with the 
higher cystatin C level than in those with the lower cystatin C level (15.2% vs
0%, P=0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Cystatin C may be associated with more cardiovascular events, mainly
rehospitalization for congestive heart failure, after percutaneous coronary
intervention in patients with ST-elevation MI.

PMID: 19597298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Congenit Heart Dis. 2013 Mar-Apr;8(2):103-10. doi:
10.1111/j.1747-0803.2012.00717.x. Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Impact of central venous pressure on cardiorenal interactions in adult patients
with congenital heart disease after biventricular repair.

Ohuchi H(1), Ikado H, Noritake K, Miyazaki A, Yasuda K, Yamada O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular
Center, Osaka, Japan. hohuchi@hsp.ncvc.go.jp

BACKGROUND: Cardiorenal interactions adversely impact the prognosis in heart
failure patients an effect which crucially involves increased central venous
pressure (CVP). However, it is unclear whether the same pathophysiology operates 
in adults with congenital heart disease (CHD).
PURPOSE: The present study was designed to assess cardiorenal interactions in
adults with CHD after biventricular repair.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We measured the kidney length (KL, cm/m) and renal resistive
index (RI) in 77 consecutive patients and 30 controls. We also measured
hemodynamics, plasma B-type natriuretic peptide level, 24-hour creatinine
clearance, and peak oxygen uptake in each patient. The CVP correlated with the KL
(r = 0.44, P <.001) and the RI was greater in the patients (P <.0001). The high
RI was independently determined by the CVP, aortic pressure, and cardiac index (P
<.05-.001), and correlated with the 24-hour creatinine clearance (r = -0.30, P
<.05). The RI correlated closely with the neurohumoral activations and peak
oxygen uptake (|r| = 0.45-0.50, P <.0001), and the patients with a traditional
criteria of high RI (≥0.70) had a higher incidence of cardiovascular events that 
required unscheduled hospitalization (hazard ratio = 2.78, 95% confidence
interval 1.26-6.10, P <.05). Multivariate Cox model with the cutoff values of KL 
≥68 cm/m and RI ≥0.74 revealed that a greater KL (hazard ratio = 4.03, 95%
confidence interval 1.46-11.1, P <.01) as well as B-type natriuretic peptide (P
<.001) independently predicted the events.
CONCLUSIONS: Hemodynamics, especially a high CVP, independently predicted the
enlarged kidney and abnormal intrarenal flow dynamics that are closely associated
with heart failure severity and cardiovascular events in adults with CHD after
biventricular repair.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22967266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J N Y State Nurses Assoc. 2007 Fall-2008 Winter;38(2):13-9.

Heart and brain matters in heart failure: a literature review.

Athilingam P(1), King KB.

Author information: 
(1)Strong Memorial Hospital, University of Rochester Medical Center in Rochester,
NY, USA.

Heart failure (HF) patients are reported to have twice the risk of having
cognitive deficits compared to the general population. Cognitive impairment in
this population may cause non-compliance to prescribed self-care regimens and
delay in seeking care that may potentially lead to frequent readmissions.
Although cognitive deficit is common among people with HF, cognitive screening is
not routinely performed due to lack of a simple screening tool and the
misconception that cognitive changes are part of normal aging. Therefore, future 
research needs to focus on identifying a simple screening tool that nurses can
use to screen for subtle changes in cognition including forgetfulness and delayed
recall. Early identification of subtle cognitive changes has the potential to
guide healthcare providers to formulate feasible strategies to understand and/or 
prevent a low cardiac output state before major cognitive impairment becomes
evident.

PMID: 18683451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2014 Jan;30(1):129-36. doi: 10.1007/s10554-013-0303-x. 
Epub 2013 Oct 9.

Impact of white blood cell count on myocardial salvage, infarct size, and
clinical outcomes in patients undergoing primary percutaneous coronary
intervention for ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: a magnetic resonance
imaging study.

Chung S(1), Song YB, Hahn JY, Chang SA, Lee SC, Choe YH, Choi SH, Choi JH, Lee
SH, Oh JK, Gwon HC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Cardiac and Vascular Center, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 50, Irwon-dong, Gangnam-gu, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

We sought to determine the relationship between white blood cell count (WBCc) and
infarct size assessed by cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) in
patients undergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for
ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). In 198 patients undergoing primary
PCI for STEMI, WBCc was measured upon arrival and CMR was performed a median of 7
days after the index event. Infarct size was measured on delayed enhancement
imaging and the area at risk (AAR) was quantified on T2-weighted images. Baseline
characteristics were not significantly different between the high WBCc group
(>11,000/mm(3), n = 91) and low WBCc group (≤11,000/mm(3), n = 107). The median
infarct size was larger in the high WBCc group than in the low WBCc group [22.0% 
(16.7-33.9) vs. 14.7% (8.5-24.7), p < 0.01]. Compared with the low WBCc group,
the high WBCc group had a greater extent of AAR and a smaller myocardial salvage 
index [MSI = (AAR-infarct size)/AAR × 100]. The major adverse cardiovascular
events (MACE) including cardiac death, nonfatal reinfarction, and
rehospitalization for congestive heart failure at 12-month occurred more
frequently in the high WBCc group (12.1 vs. 0.9%, p < 0.01). In multivariate
analysis, high WBCc significantly increased the risk of a large infarct (OR 3.04 
95% CI 1.65-5.61, p < 0.01), a low MSI (OR 2.08, 95% CI 1.13-3.86, p = 0.02), and
1-year MACE (OR 16.0, 95% CI 1.89-134.5, p = 0.01). In patients undergoing
primary PCI for STEMI, an elevated baseline WBCc is associated with less salvaged
myocardium, larger infarct size and poorer clinical outcomes.

PMID: 24104952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2014 Oct;30(7):1289-95. doi: 10.1007/s10554-014-0468-y.
Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Prognostic significance of dilated inferior vena cava in advanced decompensated
heart failure.

Lee HF(1), Hsu LA, Chang CJ, Chan YH, Wang CL, Ho WJ, Chu PH.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Dilated inferior vena cava (IVC) is prevalent among patients with heart failure
(HF), but whether its presence predicts worsening renal function (WRF) or adverse
outcomes is unclear. This cohort study analyzed patients with left ventricular
ejection fraction <40 % and repeated hospitalizations (≥2 times) for HF between
August 2009 and August 2011. The study endpoints were death and HF
re-hospitalization. Among baseline parameters, IVC diameter was the most powerful
predictor for the development of WRF (area under the curve = 0.795, cut-off value
= 20.5 mm). During the 2-year follow-up, 36 patients (49 %) were re-hospitalized 
for HF and 14 patients (19 %) died. The event rates were significantly greater in
the WRF group than in the non-WRF group (71 vs. 30 %, P < 0.001 for HF
re-hospitalization; 29 vs. 10 %, P = 0.03 for death). In Cox regression model,
the risk of combined end-points was increased in patients with aging, elevated
blood urine nitrogen, IVC >21 mm, and WRF. When adjusted for confounding factors,
IVC >21 mm [hazard ratio (HR) 3.73, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.66-8.34] and 
WRF (HR 2.68, 95 % CI 1.07-6.75) were significant predictors for adverse
outcomes. In patients with advanced decompensated HF, dilated IVC (>21 mm)
predicted the development of WRF and could be a predictor for adverse outcomes.

PMID: 24939288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Resour Manag. 2001 Jan;2(1):12-3, 1.

Heart failure intervention cuts return trips to hospital.

[No authors listed]

Hospitals collaborate to cut heart failure readmissions. A consortium of
hospitals in New York state collaborate to reduce readmissions among their heart 
failure patients without compromising quality. The eye-opening part was
discovering the cause of readmissions.

PMID: 11215354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Telemed J E Health. 2008 Oct;14(8):753-61. doi: 10.1089/tmj.2007.0131.

Evaluation of home telehealth following hospitalization for heart failure: a
randomized trial.

Wakefield BJ(1), Ward MM, Holman JE, Ray A, Scherubel M, Burns TL, Kienzle MG,
Rosenthal GE.

Author information: 
(1)Harry S Truman Memorial Veterans Hospital, Columbia, Missouri 65201, USA.
bonnie.wakefield@va.gov

Previous studies have found that home-based intervention programs reduce
readmission rates for patients with heart failure. Only one previous trial has
compared telephone and videophone to traditional care to deliver a home-based
heart failure intervention program. The objective of this study was to evaluate
the efficacy of a telehealth-facilitated postdischarge support program in
reducing resource use in patients with heart failure. Patients at a Midwestern
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center were randomized to telephone,
videophone, or usual care for follow-up care after hospitalization for heart
failure exacerbation. Outcome measures included readmission rates; time to first 
readmission; urgent care clinic visits; survival; and quality of life. The
intervention resulted in a significantly longer time to readmission but had no
effect on readmission rates or mortality. There were no differences in hospital
days or urgent care clinic use. All subjects reported higher disease-specific
quality of life scores at 1 year. There was evidence of the value of telephone
follow-up, but there was no evidence to support the benefit of videophone care
over telephone care. Rigorous evaluation is needed to determine which patients
may benefit most from specific telehealth applications and which technologies are
most cost-effective.

PMID: 18954244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Vessels. 2014 Mar;29(2):156-64. doi: 10.1007/s00380-013-0339-9. Epub 2013
Apr 4.

Impact of aging on the clinical outcomes of Japanese patients with coronary
artery disease after percutaneous coronary intervention.

Kaneko H(1), Yajima J, Oikawa Y, Tanaka S, Fukamachi D, Suzuki S, Sagara K,
Otsuka T, Matsuno S, Funada R, Kano H, Uejima T, Koike A, Nagashima K, Kirigaya
H, Sawada H, Aizawa T, Yamashita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Cardiovascular Institute, 3-2-19,
Nishiazabu, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 106-0031, Japan, h-kaneko@cvi.or.jp.

Japan has become an aging society, resulting in an increased prevalence of
coronary artery disease. However, clinical outcomes of elderly Japanese patients 
after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) remain unclear. Of the 15,227
patients in the Shinken Database, a single-hospital-based cohort of new patients,
1,214 patients who underwent PCI, was evaluated to determine the differences in
clinical outcomes between the elderly (≥75 years) (n = 260) and the non-elderly
(<75 years) (n = 954) patients. A major adverse cardiac event (MACE) was defined 
as a composite end point, including all-cause death, myocardial infarction (MI), 
and target lesion revascularization. Male gender and obesity were less common,
and the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was significantly lower in
the elderly than in the non-elderly. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF)
was comparable between these groups. Left main trunk disease and multivessel
disease were more common in the elderly than in the non-elderly group. Occurrence
of MACE was frequent, and the incidences of all-cause death, cardiac death, and
the admission rate for heart failure were significantly higher in the elderly
patients. Multivariate analysis showed that prior MI, low eGFR, and poor LVEF
were independent predictors for all-cause death in the elderly patients. Elderly 
patients had worse clinical outcomes than the non-elderly patients. Low eGFR and 
LVEF were independent predictors of all-cause death after PCI, suggesting that
left ventricular dysfunction and renal dysfunction might synergistically
contribute to the adverse clinical outcomes of the elderly patients undergoing
PCI.

PMCID: PMC3948512
PMID: 23552901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Card Fail. 2001 Dec;7(4):289-98.

Quality of care and hospital readmission in congestive heart failure: an explicit
review process.

Polanczyk CA(1), Newton C, Dec GW, Di Salvo TG.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure and Cardiac Transplantation Unit, Division of Cardiology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Comment in
    J Card Fail. 2001 Dec;7(4):299-301.

BACKGROUND: The effect of hospital quality of care on hospital readmission for
patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) has not been widely studied.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined the effects of clinical factors, hospital
quality of care, and cardiologist involvement on 3-month readmission rates in
patients with CHF by using a 125-item explicit review instrument comprising 3
major domains: admission work-up, evaluation and treatment, and readiness for
discharge. During the 3 months after discharge, 59 (30%) of 205 patients were
readmitted for CHF. The average evaluation and treatment score was lower for
readmitted patients (63% v 58%; P = .04). The specific quality criteria differing
between patients readmitted or not readmitted included the performance of any
diagnostic evaluation, performance of echocardiography in patients with unknown
ejection fraction or suspected valvular disease, and therapy with an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor on discharge. Patients with <or=50% of
the evaluation and treatment criteria met were more likely to be readmitted (odds
ratio, 2.5; 95% confidence interval, 1.1-5.3; P = .02). In a multivariate model
including both clinical characteristics and quality criteria, a low evaluation
and treatment score was an independent predictor of readmission. Cardiologist
involvement was correlated with higher quality-of-care scores in the admission
work-up (4.8% higher; P < .01) and evaluation and treatment (8.6% higher; P <
.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Hospital quality of care for patients with CHF is independently
associated with 3-month readmission rates, and cardiologist involvement during
hospitalization is associated with overall quality of care.

PMID: 11782850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2012 May;65(5):421-6. doi:
10.1016/j.recesp.2011.09.011. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Influence of obesity and malnutrition on acute heart failure.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Zapatero A(1), Barba R, Gonzalez N, Losa JE, Plaza S, Canora J, Marco J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Universitario de Fuenlabrada,
Fuenlabrada, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2012 Jun;65(6):583; author reply 584.
    Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2012 May;65(5):403-4.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Obesity is an independent risk factor for the
development of heart failure. Several recent studies have found better outcomes
of heart failure for obese patients, an observation termed as the "obesity
paradox." On the other hand, the negative effect of malnutrition on the evolution
of heart failure has also been clearly established.
METHODS: Data from the Minimum Basic Data Set were analyzed for all patients
discharged from all the departments of internal medicine in hospitals of the
Spanish National Health System between the years 2006 and 2008. The information
was limited to those patients with a primary or secondary diagnosis of heart
failure. Patients with a diagnosis of obesity or malnutrition were identified.
The mortality and readmission indexes of obese and malnourished patients were
compared against the subpopulation without these diagnoses.
RESULTS: A total of 370,983 heart failure admittances were analyzed, with 41,127 
(11.1%) diagnosed with obesity and 4105 (1.1%) with malnutrition. In-hospital
global mortality reached 12.9% and the risk of readmission was 16.4%. Obese
patients had a lower in-hospital mortality risk (odds ratio [OR]: 0.65, 95%
confidence interval [95%CI]: 0.62-0.68) and early readmission risk (OR: 0.81,
95%CI: 0.78-0.83) than nonobese patients. Malnourished patients had a much higher
risk of dying while in hospital (OR: 1.83 95%CI: 1.69-1.97) or of being
readmitted within 30 days after discharge (OR: 1.39, 95%CI: 1.29-1.51), even
after adjusting for possible confounding factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Obesity in patients admitted for HF substantially reduces
in-hospital mortality risk and the possibility of early readmission, whereas
malnutrition is associated with important increases in in-hospital mortality and 
risk of readmission in the 30 days following discharge.

Copyright © 2011 Sociedad Española de Cardiología. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22133785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Hosp Med. 2010 Jul-Aug;5(6):E9. doi: 10.1002/jhm.796.

In response to: The paradox of readmission.

Cakir B.

Comment on
    J Hosp Med. 2010 Mar;5(3):148-53.

PMID: 20803666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2012 Jul 1;5(4):414-21. doi:
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.964791. Epub 2012 May 2.

Lifetime analysis of hospitalizations and survival of patients newly admitted
with heart failure.

Chun S(1), Tu JV, Wijeysundera HC, Austin PC, Wang X, Levy D, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, Division of Cardiology, Sunnybrook
Health Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Comment in
    Circ Heart Fail. 2012 Jul 1;5(4):398-400.

BACKGROUND: Hospital readmissions for heart failure (HF) contribute to increased 
morbidity and resource burden. Predictors of hospitalization and patterns of
cardiovascular events over the lifetime of patients with HF have not been
elucidated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined recurrent hospitalizations, cardiovascular
events, and survival among newly discharged (April 1999-March 2001) patients with
HF in the Enhanced Feedback For Effective Cardiac Treatment phase 1 study. During
10-year follow-up, we examined all new cardiovascular hospitalizations and
selected predictors of readmission. Among 8543 patients (mean age, 77.4±10.5
years; 51.6% women) followed for 22 567 person-years, 60.7% had ischemic
etiology, and 67.3% had HF with reduced ejection fraction (left ventricular
ejection fraction ≤45% versus >45% [HF with preserved ejection fraction]).
Overall, 10-year mortality was 98.8%, with 35 966 hospital readmissions occurring
over the lifetime of the cohort. Adjusted hazards ratios (HRs) for first
cardiovascular hospitalization were 1.36 for ischemic HF (95% CI, 1.28-1.44;
P<0.001), 1.10 for HF with reduced ejection fraction (95% CI; 1.00-1.20;
P=0.045), and 1.00 for men (95% CI, 0.94-1.06; P=0.979). On repeated-events
time-to-event analysis, ischemic HF was a predictor of cardiovascular (HR, 1.24; 
95% CI, 1.18-1.29), HF (HR, 1.20; 95% CI, 1.13-1.27), and coronary heart disease 
(HR, 2.01; 95% CI, 1.81-2.24) hospitalizations (all P<0.001). Of all recurrent HF
hospitalizations, 26.8% occurred in the first and 39.8% in the last deciles of
cohort survival duration. Similarly, 29.7% and 52.3% of all cardiovascular
readmissions occurred in the first and last deciles of the cohort survival
duration, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Among newly discharged patients with HF, cardiovascular events were 
clustered at early postdischarge and prefatal time periods, and were increased
among those with ischemic etiology.

PMID: 22556322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2004 Jun;6(4):421-6.

Impact of atrial fibrillation on mortality and readmission in older adults
hospitalized with heart failure.

Ahmed A(1), Thornton P, Perry GJ, Allman RM, DeLong JF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine, School
of Medicine, Center for Aging and Geriatric Heart Failure Clinic, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. aahmed@uab.edu

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation is common in older adults with heart failure. It 
is known to adversely affect outcomes.
AIM: To examine the associations of atrial fibrillation with 4-year mortality and
30-day readmission in older adults hospitalized with heart failure.
METHODS: Patients were Medicare beneficiaries 65 years of age and older
discharged with a primary diagnosis of heart failure. Baseline data were obtained
by retrospective chart reviews and data on mortality and readmission were
obtained from Medicare administrative files. Presence of atrial fibrillation was 
confirmed using electrocardiogram during hospital admission. Using Cox
proportional hazards models we estimated bivariate and multivariable (adjusted
for various patient and care covariates) hazards ratios (HR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) for 4-year mortality and 30-day readmission of patients with
atrial fibrillation compared with those without.
RESULTS: Patients (n=944) had a mean age (+/-S.D.) of 79 (+/-7) years, 61% were
women, 18% African-Americans, 25% had atrial fibrillation by admission
electrocardiogram, 64% died within 4 years, and 8% were readmitted. Patients with
atrial fibrillation had a 52% increased risk of 4-year mortality (adjusted
HR=1.52; 95%CI=1.11-2.07). Atrial fibrillation was also associated with higher
risk of readmission (unadjusted HR=1.64; 95%CI=1.01-2.68). However, the
association lost its statistical significance after adjustment for various
patient and care variables (adjusted HR=2.09; 95%CI=0.94-4.65).
CONCLUSION: Presence of atrial fibrillation was associated with significant
increased risk of long-term mortality in older adults hospitalized with heart
failure and was associated with a non-significant higher risk of hospital
readmission.

PMID: 15182766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2014 Feb;7(2):128-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2013.08.015.
Epub 2014 Jan 15.

Impact of new-onset persistent left bundle branch block on late clinical outcomes
in patients undergoing transcatheter aortic valve implantation with a
balloon-expandable valve.

Urena M(1), Webb JG(2), Cheema A(3), Serra V(4), Toggweiler S(2), Barbanti M(2), 
Cheung A(2), Ye J(2), Dumont E(1), DeLarochellière R(1), Doyle D(1), Al Lawati
HA(2), Peterson M(3), Chisholm R(3), Igual A(4), Ribeiro HB(1), Nombela-Franco
L(1), Philippon F(1), Garcia del Blanco B(4), Rodés-Cabau J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Quebec Heart and Lung Institute, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec,
Canada. (2)St. Paul's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. (3)St. Michael's Hospital, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat
Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Quebec Heart and Lung Institute,
Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address:
josep.rodes@criucpq.ulaval.ca.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2014 Mar;11(3):127.
    JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2014 Feb;7(2):137-9.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine the impact of new-onset
persistent left bundle branch block (NOP-LBBB) on late outcomes after
transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI).
BACKGROUND: The impact of NOP-LBBB after TAVI remains controversial.
METHODS: A total of 668 consecutive patients who underwent TAVI with a
balloon-expandable valve without pre-existing LBBB or permanent pacemaker
implantation (PPI) were included. Electrocardiograms were obtained at baseline,
immediately after the procedure, and daily until hospital discharge. Patients
were followed at 1, 6, and 12 months and yearly thereafter.
RESULTS: New-onset LBBB occurred in 128 patients (19.2%) immediately after TAVI
and persisted at hospital discharge in 79 patients (11.8%). At a median follow-up
of 13 months (range 3 to 27 months), there were no differences in mortality rate 
between the NOP-LBBB and no NOP-LBBB groups (27.8% vs. 28.4%; adjusted-hazard
ratio: 0.87 [95% confidence interval (CI): 0.55 to 1.37]; p = 0.54). There were
no differences between groups regarding cardiovascular mortality (p = 0.82),
sudden death (p = 0.87), rehospitalizations for all causes (p = 0.11), or heart
failure (p = 0.55). NOP-LBBB was the only factor associated with an increased
rate of PPI during the follow-up period (13.9% vs. 3.0%; hazard ratio: 4.29 [95% 
CI: 2.03 to 9.07], p < 0.001. NOP-LBBB was also associated with a lack of left
ventricular ejection fraction improvement and poorer New York Heart Association
functional class at follow-up (p < 0.02 for both).
CONCLUSIONS: NOP-LBBB occurred in ∼1 of 10 patients who had undergone TAVI with a
balloon-expandable valve. NOP-LBBB was associated with a higher rate of PPI, a
lack of improvement in left ventricular ejection fraction, and a poorer
functional status, but did not increase the risk of global or cardiovascular
mortality or rehospitalizations at 1-year follow-up.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24440024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Med J Aust. 2010 Jan 4;192(1):9-13.

Caveat anicula! Beware of quiet little old ladies: demographic features,
pharmacotherapy, readmissions and survival in a 10-year cohort of patients with
heart failure and preserved systolic function.

Wong DT(1), Clark RA, Dundon BK, Philpott A, Molaee P, Shakib S.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

Comment in
    Med J Aust. 2010 Jan 4;192(1):4-5.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether heart failure with preserved systolic function
(HFPSF) has different natural history from left ventricular systolic dysfunction 
(LVSD).
DESIGN AND SETTING: A retrospective analysis of 10 years of data (for patients
admitted between 1 July 1994 and 30 June 2004, and with a study census date of 30
June 2005) routinely collected as part of clinical practice in a large tertiary
referral hospital.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Sociodemographic characteristics, diagnostic features,
comorbid conditions, pharmacotherapies, readmission rates and survival.
RESULTS: Of the 2961 patients admitted with chronic heart failure, 753 had
echocardiograms available for this analysis. Of these, 189 (25%) had normal left 
ventricular size and systolic function. In comparison to patients with LVSD,
those with HFPSF were more often female (62.4% v 38.5%; P = 0.001), had less
social support, and were more likely to live in nursing homes (17.9% v 7.6%; P < 
0.001), and had a greater prevalence of renal impairment (86.7% v 6.2%; P =
0.004), anaemia (34.3% v 6.3%; P = 0.013) and atrial fibrillation (51.3% v 47.1%;
P = 0.008), but significantly less ischaemic heart disease (53.4% v 81.2%; P =
0.001). Patients with HFPSF were less likely to be prescribed an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (61.9% v 72.5%; P = 0.008); carvedilol
was used more frequently in LVSD (1.5% v 8.8%; P < 0.001). Readmission rates were
higher in the HFPSF group (median, 2 v 1.5 admissions; P = 0.032), particularly
for malignancy (4.2% v 1.8%; P < 0.001) and anaemia (3.9% v 2.3%; P < 0.001).
Both groups had the same poor survival rate (P = 0.912).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with HFPSF were predominantly older women with less social 
support and higher readmission rates for associated comorbid illnesses. We
therefore propose that reduced survival in HFPSF may relate more to comorbid
conditions than suboptimal cardiac management.

PMID: 20047541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Cardiol. 2010 Nov;33(11):708-14. doi: 10.1002/clc.20812.

Higher C-reactive protein predicts worse prognosis in acute heart failure only in
noninfected patients.

Lourenço P(1), Paulo Araújo J, Paulo C, Mascarenhas J, Friões F, Azevedo A,
Bettencourt P.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Department, Faculty of Medicine of Porto University, Porto, 
Portugal. pamlourenco@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: The prognostic role of C-reactive protein (CRP) in acute heart
failure (HF) is not fully understood, and the impact of an infectious process in 
its risk-stratification power was not previously evaluated.
HYPOTHESIS: As CRP is an inflammatory marker, its prognostic value in acute HF is
probably different in patients with and without concurrent infection.
METHODS: We recruited patients admitted to our hospital due to acute HF from
October 2006 to October 2007. All patients were given treatment at the discretion
of the attending physician. Serum CRP was measured at discharge in 225 patients. 
We followed patients for 3 months after discharge to assess occurrence of
all-cause death or readmission due to HF. Infection was defined according to
diagnoses registered on the discharge record. Patients were classified according 
to CRP tertiles, in the entire sample and in groups according to infection
occurrence.
RESULTS: : An infectious condition occurred in 109 patients (first and second CRP
tertiles: 8.8 and 27.4 mg/L, respectively). No infection was detected in 116
patients (5.0 and 12.3 mg/L, respectively). In the group with infection, CRP was 
not a good predictor of adverse outcome. In the noninfected group, the hazard
ratio of those with CRP > 12.3 mg/L was 2.46 (95% confidence interval: 1.29-4.70)
in comparison with those with lower CRP. Adjusted hazard ratio for ischemic heart
disease and diabetes was 2.03 (95% confidence interval: 1.06-3.91).
CONCLUSIONS: CRP had no prognostic value in acute HF patients with an infectious 
complication. Noninfected patients with higher CRP at discharge had worse
prognosis.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21089116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 15;363(3):297-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1001882.

Are all readmissions bad readmissions?

Gorodeski EZ, Starling RC, Blackstone EH.

PMID: 20647209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Psychol Med. 2011 Apr;41(4):731-8. doi: 10.1017/S0033291710001133. Epub 2010 Jun 
16.

Vital exhaustion and cardiovascular prognosis in myocardial infarction and heart 
failure: predictive power of different trajectories.

Smith OR(1), Kupper N, Denollet J, de Jonge P.

Author information: 
(1)CoRPS - Center of Research on Psychology in Somatic Diseases, Tilburg
University, Tilburg, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: We examined the different trajectories of vital exhaustion (VE) over 
a 12-month period and their impact on prognosis in a sample of myocardial
infarction (MI) and chronic heart failure (CHF) patients.
METHOD: Consecutive MI (n=407) and CHF patients (n=297) were assessed at
baseline, and at 3- and 12-month follow-up for symptoms of VE. Latent growth
mixture modelling was used to examine the course of VE over time. The combined
clinical endpoint was defined as cardiac hospital readmission or death.
RESULTS: Four distinct trajectories for VE were found: low VE, decreasing VE,
increasing VE, and severe VE. Sex, marital status, left ventricular ejection
fraction, psychotropic medication, sample group (CHF v. MI) and depressive
symptoms were associated with VE, varying according to classes. The mean
follow-up period was 25.3 months in which 34.7% of the patients experienced an
event. Multivariate Cox regression showed that, compared with patients in the low
VE class, patients in the increasing VE class [hazard ratio (HR)=1.16, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.58-3.61, p=0.01], and the severe VE class (HR=1.69,
95% CI 1.31-2.64, p=0.02) had an increased risk for adverse cardiovascular events
(i.e. cardiovascular hospital readmission or cardiovascular death). Decreasing VE
was not related to adverse cardiovascular events (HR=0.97, 95% CI 0.66-1.69,
p=0.81).
CONCLUSIONS: VE trajectories varied across cardiac patients, and had a
differential effect on cardiovascular outcome. Increasing VE and severe VE
classes were predictors of poor cardiovascular prognosis. These results suggest
that identification of cardiac patients with an increased risk of adverse health 
outcomes should be based on multiple assessments of VE.

PMID: 20553635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Cardiol Young. 2013 Apr;23(2):258-64. doi: 10.1017/S1047951112000777. Epub 2012
Jun 14.

Extended survival and re-hospitalisation among paediatric patients requiring
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for primary cardiac dysfunction.

Erwin N(1), Zuk J, Kaufman J, Pan Z, Carpenter E, Mitchell MB, da Cruz EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Heart Institute, Children's Hospital Colorado,
School of Medicine, University of Colorado at Denver, 13120 East 16th Avenue,
Aurora, CO 80045, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Although survival to hospital discharge among children requiring
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support for medical and surgical
cardio-circulatory failure has been reported in international registries,
extended survival and re-hospitalisation rates have not been well described in
the literature.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This is a single-institution, retrospective review of all
paediatric patients receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for primary
cardiac dysfunction over a 5-year period.
RESULTS: A total of 74 extracorporeal membrane oxygenation runs in 68 patients
were identified, with a median follow-up of 5.4 years from hospital discharge.
Overall, 66% of patients were decannulated alive and 25 patients (37%) survived
to discharge. There were three late deaths at 5 months, 20 months, and 6.8 years 
from discharge. Of the hospital survivors, 88% required re-hospitalisation, with 
63% of re-admissions for cardiac indications. The median number of
hospitalisations per patient per year was 0.62, with the first re-admission
occurring at a mean time of 9 months after discharge from the index
hospitalisation. In all, 38% of patients required further cardiac surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Extended survival rates for paediatric hospital survivors of cardiac
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support for medical and post-surgical
indications are encouraging. However, re-hospitalisation within the first year
following hospital discharge is common, and many patients require further cardiac
surgery. Although re-admission hospital mortality is low, longer-term follow-up
of quality-of-life indicators is required

PMID: 22694830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Res Cardiol. 2008 Dec;97(12):882-90. doi: 10.1007/s00392-008-701-6. Epub
2008 Aug 11.

The initial slope of the VCO2/VO2-curve (s1) in cardiopulmonary exercise testing 
is a strong and independent predictor of outcome in patients with previous
myocardial infarction.

Honold J(1), Geiger L, Assmus B, Fischer-Rasokat U, Schaechinger V, Zeiher AM,
Spyridopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cardiology, J. W. Goethe University Hospital, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7,
60590, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Detecting heart failure (HF) patients at risk is a relevant clinical 
problem. Our goal was to define associations of clinical HF-markers and exercise 
parameters with respect to their prognostic power in HF-patients.
METHODS: We performed cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) in 103 ischemic
HF-patients. CPET-parameters included peak VO(2), VO(2) at AT, peak oxygen pulse,
minimal CO(2) and O(2) equivalents, VE/VCO(2) and s1, a motivation-independent
and submaximal parameter representing the initial slope of the VCO(2)/VO(2)-curve
that has not been described in HF-patients so far.
RESULTS: Median follow-up was 668 days. The combined endpoint of cardiovascular
death and rehospitalization due to HF occurred in 14 patients. Patients
with/without events differed significantly regarding their age, NYHA-class, LVEF 
and NT-proBNP serum-levels. Patients with events had significantly lower peak
VO(2)- and higher s1-values. NT-proBNP serum-levels, NYHA-class and LVEF were
significantly correlated with peak VO(2). Only age, peak VO(2) and s1 were
independent predictors of adverse events. Using multivariate analysis, s1 was a
strong and independent parameter with good sensitivity and specificity.
CONCLUSION: s1 is an independent and powerful predictor in HF-patients. Since s1 
is independent of maximal exercise capacity, s1 might be more accurate for the
evaluation of HF-patients not willing or unable to perform maximal exercise.

PMID: 18696021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Int Heart J. 2015;56(2):219-25. doi: 10.1536/ihj.14-290. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Incidence and predictors of rehospitalization of acute heart failure patients.

Kaneko H(1), Suzuki S, Goto M, Arita T, Yuzawa Y, Yagi N, Murata N, Kato Y, Kano 
H, Matsuno S, Otsuka T, Uejima T, Oikawa Y, Sagara K, Nagashima K, Kirigaya H,
Sawada H, Aizawa T, Yajima J, Yamashita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Cardiovascular Institute.

Repeated hospitalization due to acute decompensated heart failure (HF) is a
pandemic health problem in Japan. However, it is difficult to predict
rehospitalization after discharge for acute decompensated HF. We used a single
hospital-based cohort from the Shinken Database 2004-2012, comprising all new
patients (n = 19,994) who visited the Cardiovascular Institute Hospital. A total 
of 282 patients discharged after their first acute HF admission were included in 
the analysis. The median follow-up period was 908 ± 865 days. Of these patients, 
rehospitalization due to worsening HF occurred in 55 patients. The cumulative
rate of rehospitalization was 17.5% at 1 year, 21.4% at 2 years, and 25.5% at 3
years. Patients with rehospitalization were older than those without
rehospitalization. Prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM) was more common in
patients with rehospitalization. Average heart rate (HR) tended to be higher in
patients with rehospitalization. Loop diuretics were more commonly used at
hospital discharge in patients with rehospitalization. Multivariate Cox
regression analysis revealed that age ≥ 75 years, DM, HR ≥ 75 bpm at discharge,
and use of loop diuretics at discharge were independent predictors for
rehospitalization. The number of these independent risk factors could be used to 
clearly discriminate between the HF rehospitalization low-, middle- and high-risk
patients. HF rehospitalization commonly occurred in patients who were discharged 
after their first acute HF admission. Older age, DM, increased HR, and loop
diuretics use at discharge were independently associated with HF
rehospitalization. By simply counting these risk factors, we might be able to
predict the risk of HF rehospitalization after discharge.

PMID: 25740584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Cardiology. 2013;125(2):96-103. doi: 10.1159/000348334. Epub 2013 May 24.

QRS prolongation in the prediction of clinical cardiac events in patients with
acute heart failure: analysis of data from the Korean Acute Heart Failure
Registry.

Park HS(1), Kim H, Park JH, Han S, Yoo BS, Shin MS, Seong IW, Ahn Y, Kang SM, Kim
JJ, Jeon ES, Cho MC, Choi DJ, Chae SC, Kim YJ, Seo HS, Oh BH, Lee MM, Ryu KH.

Author information: 
(1)Keimyung University Dongsan Medical Center, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVES: A prolonged QRS duration has been associated with an unfavorable
prognosis in chronic compensated heart failure (HF). However, its predictive
value during an admission for acute HF is limited, even in HF with a preserved
ejection fraction (EF). The purpose of this study was to evaluate the prognostic 
utility of the QRS duration in acute HF.
METHODS: Analyses were performed using data from 1,489 patients with a 2-year
follow-up. The patients were selected from the Korean Acute Heart Failure
Registry and were divided into three groups according to QRS duration (≤80,
81-119 or ≥120 ms). The all-cause mortality and readmission for HF were assessed.
RESULTS: During the study period, 774 primary events occurred (359 deaths and 415
HF). The event frequencies were higher in patients with a prolonged QRS duration.
The increased risk associated with the QRS duration was also demonstrated after
adjustment for cardiac outcome variables. The prognostic significance of the QRS 
duration was demonstrated in patients with reduced EF but not in those with a
preserved EF.
CONCLUSIONS: A prolonged QRS duration could be a significant predictor of the
2-year cardiac outcome in patients with acute HF, particularly in those with a
reduced EF.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23711763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2001 Feb 15;87(4):483-7, A7.

Effect of combined aspirin and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor therapy
versus angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor therapy alone on readmission rates
in heart failure.

Harjai KJ(1), Nunez E, Turgut T, Newman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Ochsner Medical Institutions, New Orleans,
Louisiana, USA. kharjai@ochsner.org

An adverse interaction between aspirin and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors is suspected in patients with heart failure, but the effect of
combined therapy with these agents on hospital readmission rates is unknown. Our 
study found that combining aspirin with ACE inhibitors is associated with higher 
early readmission rates than use of ACE inhibitors alone, particularly in
patients with depressed ejection fraction and in those without coronary artery
disease.

PMID: 11179543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Cardiol. 2010 Mar;33(3):E13-8. doi: 10.1002/clc.20476.

Influence of gender on long-term prognosis of patients with chronic heart failure
seen in heart failure clinics.

Jiménez-Navarro MF(1), Ramirez-Marrero MA, Anguita-Sánchez M, Castillo JC;
BADAPIC Investigators.

Collaborators: Domínguez Barrio P, España Barrio E, Batlle López E, Sogorb Garri 
F, Climent Payá V, Alvarez Rubiera J, Rubio Alcaide A, Casares García G, Martínez
de la Concha L, Lupón Roses J, Pajarón Rodríguez T, Andrés Novales J, Méndez S,
Galve E, de Miguel MA, López Gómez D, Saenz L, Alvarez A, Ruiz Hidalgo D, Montiel
Dacosta JA, Roig Monguell E, Cupoletti Beange A, Rossell Abaurrea F, Morcillo
Serra C, Murga Eizagaechaverria N, Serret IL, Palomino Cde L, Porras Ramos Y,
Torrent JL, Navarro Bellver A, Anguita Sánchez M, Ojeda Pineda S, García de
Burgos y de Rico F, Torrent AJ, Zumalde Otegui J, Salcedo Arruti A, Orosa
Fernández P, Nelisen CL, Baun O, Ventin Pereira JL, Montull Morer S, Guitard R,
Vargas Machuca JC, García-Arboleya Puerto F, Manito Lorite N, Kaplinsky E, Bayon 
Fernández J, Montes Montes M, González Maqueda I, Guzmán Martín G, Soler Rangel
L, Arnalich Fernández F, Fernández Escribano M, González Cocina E, Torres Calvo
F, de Mora Martín M, Pérez Ruiz JM, de Teresa Galván E, Molero Campos E, Jiménez 
Navarro M, Recalde del Vigo E, Gurrutxaga Arrillaga N, Pérez de Juan MA, de Toro 
Santos M, Díaz Molina B, Rodríguez Lambert JL, Librada Escribano F, Gutiérrez
Alemany J, Portillo Sánchez J, Marimón Cortés F, palazón Molina O, Sánchez
Fernández PL, Martín Herrero F, Querejeta Iraola R, Sánchez Haya E, Berrazueta
Fernández JR, González Juanatey JR, Gómez Otero I, Beltrán Rodríguez JC, Pastor
Torres L, Martínez Martínez A, Bardají Ruiz A, de Castro Aritmediz R, Olivan
Sayrol LC, Soriano Giménez JC, Padrón AL, Marrero Rodríguez F, Velasco Rami JA,
Ridocci Soriano F, Almenar L, Rueda Soriano J, Sevilla Toral B, Salvador Sanz A, 
de la Fuente Galán L, Calvo Iglesias F, Escribano Arias JL, Arós Borau F, del Río
Lligorit A, San Pedro Felíu A, Sanz Julve M, Blasco Peiró T, Lázaro I, Ramírez
MJ.

BACKGROUND: Controversy exists concerning the influence of gender in the
prognosis of patients with heart failure and no evidence is available from
specific heart failure clinics.
HYPOTHESIS: Women with ambulatory heart failure are managed differently than men,
although their prognosis might be better than men.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analyzed the clinical characteristics, complementary test
results, treatment, and prognosis in 4720 patients with chronic heart failure
seen in 62 specialized clinics forming part of a multicenter registry during a
mean follow-up of 40 months. The mean age was 65 +/- 12 years and 71% were men.
The men were younger than the women and more often had a history of
hyperlipidemia and ischemic heart disease. The men had a more advanced heart
failure New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class (III-IV) than the
women and a greater frequency of systolic ventricular dysfunction. The men more
often received treatment with beta-blockers, vasodilators, and antiplatelet
aggregators as well as higher mean doses as compared with the women. The overall 
survival after the follow-up was similar for both genders, although the women had
lower rates of survival free of admission for heart failure.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the mortality of women and men with heart failure being
similar, the rate of readmission for heart failure is greater in women in
specialized heart failure clinics. These results may be associated with the
pharmacological treatment differences observed.

Copyright (c) 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 20155855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JAMA. 2008 Nov 26;300(20):2398-406. doi: 10.1001/jama.2008.716.

Long-term outcomes and costs of ventricular assist devices among Medicare
beneficiaries.

Hernandez AF(1), Shea AM, Milano CA, Rogers JG, Hammill BG, O'Connor CM, Schulman
KA, Peterson ED, Curtis LH.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, PO Box 17969, Durham, NC 27715, USA.
adrian.hernandez@duke.edu

Comment in
    JAMA. 2009 Apr 22;301(16):1657; author reply 1658.
    JAMA. 2009 Apr 22;301(16):1657-8; author reply 1658.
    JAMA. 2009 Apr 22;301(16):1656-7; author reply 1658.

CONTEXT: In 2003, Medicare expanded coverage of ventricular assist devices as
destination, or permanent, therapy for end-stage heart failure. Little is known
about the long-term outcomes and costs associated with these devices.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the acute and long-term outcomes of Medicare beneficiaries 
receiving ventricular assist devices alone or after open-heart surgery.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: Analysis of inpatient claims from the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services for the period 2000 through 2006. Patients were
Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries who received a ventricular assist device
between February 2000 and June 2006 alone as primary therapy (primary device
group; n = 1476) or after cardiotomy in the previous 30 days (postcardiotomy
group; n = 1467).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Cumulative incidence of device replacement, device
removal, heart transplantation, readmission, and death, accounting for censoring 
and competing risks. Patients were followed up for at least 6 months and factors 
independently associated with long-term survival were identified. Medicare
payments were used to calculate total inpatient costs and costs per day outside
the hospital.
RESULTS: Overall 1-year survival was 51.6% (n = 669) in the primary device group 
and 30.8% (n = 424) in the postcardiotomy group. Among primary device patients,
815 (55.2%) were discharged alive with a device. Of those, 450 (55.6%) were
readmitted within 6 months and 504 (73.2%) were alive at 1 year. Of the 493
(33.6%) postcardiotomy patients discharged alive with a device, 237 (48.3%) were 
readmitted within 6 months and 355 (76.6%) were alive at 1 year. Mean 1-year
Medicare payments for inpatient care for patients in the 2000-2005 cohorts were
$178,714 (SD, $142,549) in the primary device group and $111,769 (SD, $95,413) in
the postcardiotomy group.
CONCLUSIONS: Among Medicare beneficiaries receiving a ventricular assist device, 
early mortality, morbidity, and costs remain high. Improving patient selection
and reducing perioperative mortality are critical for improving overall outcomes.

PMCID: PMC2629048
PMID: 19033590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999 May;33(6):1560-6.

Prediction of hospital readmission for heart failure: development of a simple
risk score based on administrative data.

Philbin EF(1), DiSalvo TG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan
48202, USA. ephilbi1@hfhs.org

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to develop a convenient and inexpensive
method for identifying an individual's risk for hospital readmission for
congestive heart failure (CHF) using information derived exclusively from
administrative data sources and available at the time of an index hospital
discharge.
BACKGROUND: Rates of readmission are high after hospitalization for CHF. The
significant determinants of rehospitalization are debated.
METHODS: Administrative information on all 1995 hospital discharges in New York
State which were assigned International Classification of Diseases-9-Clinical
Modification codes indicative of CHF in the principal diagnosis position were
obtained. The following were compared among hospital survivors who did and did
not experience readmission: demographics, comorbid illness, hospital type and
location, processes of care, length of stay and hospital charges.
RESULTS: A total of 42,731 black or white patients were identified. The subgroup 
of 9,112 patients (21.3%) who were readmitted were distinguished by a greater
proportion of blacks, a higher prevalence of Medicare and Medicaid insurance,
more comorbid illnesses and the use of telemetry monitoring during their index
hospitalization. Patients treated at rural hospitals, those discharged to skilled
nursing facilities and those having echocardiograms or cardiac catheterization
were less likely to be readmitted. Using multiple regression methods, a simple
methodology was devised that segregated patients into low, intermediate and high 
risk for readmission.
CONCLUSIONS: Patient characteristics, hospital features, processes of care and
clinical outcomes may be used to estimate the risk of hospital readmission for
CHF. However, some of the variation in rehospitalization risk remains unexplained
and may be the result of discretionary behavior by physicians and patients.

PMID: 10334424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Proc AMIA Symp. 2000:32-6.

Risk stratification in heart failure using artificial neural networks.

Atienza F(1), Martinez-Alzamora N, De Velasco JA, Dreiseitl S, Ohno-Machado L.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Department, University General Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
fatienzaf@meditex.es

Accurate risk stratification of heart failure patients is critical to improve
management and outcomes. Heart failure is a complex multisystem disease in which 
several predictors are categorical. Neural network models have successfully been 
applied to several medical classification problems. Using a simple neural
network, we assessed one-year prognosis in 132 patients, consecutively admitted
with heart failure, by classifying them in 3 groups: death, readmission and
one-year event-free survival. Given the small number of cases, the neural network
model was trained using a resampling method. We identified relevant predictors
using the Automatic Relevance Determination (ARD) method, and estimated their
mean effect on the 3 different outcomes. Only 9 individuals were misclassified.
Neural networks have the potential to be a useful tool for making prognosis in
the domain of heart failure.

PMCID: PMC2243942
PMID: 11079839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Cardiol. 2014 Nov 1;114(9):1379-82. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.07.071. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

Derivation and validation of a 30-day heart failure readmission model.

Fleming LM(1), Gavin M(2), Piatkowski G(2), Chang JD(2), Mukamal KJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts. Electronic address: Lfleming1@tuftsmedicalcenter.org. (2)Division 
of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.

In 2006, there were >1 million hospital admissions for heart failure (HF), and
the estimated cost to the United States in 2009 was >$37.2 billion. Better models
to target aggressive therapy to patients at the highest risk for readmission are 
clearly needed. We studied 3,413 consecutive admissions for HF based on discharge
diagnosis codes from October 2007 to August 2011 from a single academic center.
We randomly generated derivation and validation sets in a 3:1 ratio. We used
generalized estimating equations to develop our models, accounting for repeated
hospitalizations and the Hosmer-Lemeshow test to examine model calibration. The
30-day readmission rate was 24.2% in the derivation set. Of 25 candidate
variables, the best fitting model included creatinine, troponin, hematocrit, and 
hyponatremia at discharge; race; zip code of residence; discharge hour; and
number of hospitalizations in the previous year. Insignificant variables included
intravenous diuretic use on day of discharge, discharge service, diabetes, atrial
fibrillation, age, and gender. The risk of 30-day readmission increased with
increasing decile of predicted risk in both the validation and derivation
cohorts. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for the model
was 0.69 in the derivation set and 0.66 in the validation set. In conclusion, we 
derived and validated a simple model relating discharge-specific characteristics 
at risk of 30-day readmission. Application of this approach may facilitate
targeted intervention to reduce the burden of rehospitalization in patients with 
HF, but our results suggest that the best readmission models may require
incorporation of both clinical and local system factors for optimal prediction.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25200338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Aust Crit Care. 2012 Feb;25(1):31-40. doi: 10.1016/j.aucc.2011.07.004. Epub 2011 
Sep 1.

What are the factors in risk prediction models for rehospitalisation for adults
with chronic heart failure?

Betihavas V(1), Davidson PM, Newton PJ, Frost SA, Macdonald PS, Stewart S.

Author information: 
(1)Curtin Health Innovation Research Institute, The Centre for Cardiovascular and
Chronic Care, Curtin University, Sydney, Australia. v.betihavas@curtin.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Risk prediction models can assist in identifying individuals at risk 
of adverse events and also the judicious allocation of scare resources. Our
objective was to describe risk prediction models for the rehospitalisation of
individuals with chronic heart failure (CHF) and identify the elements
contributing to these models.
METHODS: The electronic data bases MEDLINE, PsychINFO, Ovid Evidence-Based
Medicine Reviews and Scopus (1950-2010), were searched for studies that describe 
models to predict all-cause hospital readmission for individuals with CHF. Search
terms included: patient readmission; risk; chronic heart failure, congestive
heart failure and heart failure. We excluded non-English studies, pediatric
studies, and publications without original data.
RESULTS: Only 1 additional model was identified since the review undertaken by
Ross and colleagues in 2008. All models were derived from data sets collected in 
the United States and patients were followed from 60 days to 18 months. The only 
common predictors of re-hospitalisation in the models identified by Ross and
colleagues were a history of diabetes mellitus and a history of prior
hospitalisation. The additional model extends its scope to include the non
clinical factors of social instability and socioeconomic status as predictors of 
rehospitalisation.
CONCLUSIONS: In spite of the burden of hospitalisation in CHF, there are limited 
tools to assist clinicians in assessing risk. Developing risk prediction models, 
based on patient, provider and system characteristics may assist in identifying
individuals in the community at greatest risk and in need of targeted
interventions to improve outcomes.

Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 21889893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Feb 20;163(2):149-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2011.06.009. Epub
2011 Jul 2.

Identifying patients at risk of death or hospitalisation due to worsening heart
failure using decision tree analysis: evidence from the Trans-European
Network-Home-Care Management System (TEN-HMS) study.

Zhang J(1), Goode KM, Rigby A, Balk AH, Cleland JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Castle Hill Hospital, Hull, UK.
Jufen.Zhang@hull.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: To stratify patients recently discharged from hospital with heart
failure (HF) according to their risk of death and/or hospitalisation for
worsening HF (WHF), to enable timely and appropriate monitoring and intervention.
METHODS: Data from the TEN-HMS study were used in this analysis. Chi-square
automatic interaction detector (CHAID) decision trees were constructed using a
10-fold cross-validation to predict events at 1-year and compared with logistic
regression (LR) models using ROC curve analysis.
RESULTS: 284 patients were used for training and 160 patients available at
4-month for validation. Amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) 
was the strongest predictor of mortality identifying groups with high (>13,492
pg/ml), medium (3127-13,492 pg/ml) and low (≤ 3127 pg/ml) risk, followed by MI,
systolic blood pressure, age, heart rhythm, study randomisation group and serum
sodium. NT-proBNP was also the strongest predictor for death or hospitalization
for WHF identifying groups with high (>13,492 pg/ml), medium (584-13,492 pg/ml), 
and low (≤ 584 pg/ml), followed by MI, creatinine, heart rhythm, potassium and
urea. CHAID trees tended to perform better than LR-models (prediction of the
composite outcome: ROC area with 95% CI, 0.797 (0.745-0.849) for CHAID and 0.738 
(0.680-0.796) for LR-model; p=0.041; prediction of mortality: 0.892 (0.853-0.931)
for CHAID and 0.858 (0.813-0.904) for LR; p=0.15).
CONCLUSIONS: Decision trees are an alternative classification method used to
differentiate risk in patients with HF. The resultant models are concise, free of
subjective variables and understood easily by clinicians. Further exploration of 
their potential and validation in other data-sets is justified.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21726908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Gen Intern Med. 1993 Nov;8(11):585-90.

Prevention of readmission in elderly patients with congestive heart failure:
results of a prospective, randomized pilot study.

Rich MW(1), Vinson JM, Sperry JC, Shah AS, Spinner LR, Chung MK, Davila-Roman V.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Cardiology Section, Jewish Hospital at Washington University Medical
Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the feasibility and potential impact of a
non-pharmacologic multidisciplinary intervention for reducing hospital
readmissions in elderly patients with congestive heart failure.
DESIGN: Prospective, randomized clinical trial, with 2:1 assignment to the study 
intervention or usual care.
SETTING: 550-bed secondary and tertiary care university teaching hospital.
PATIENTS AND PARTICIPANTS: 98 patients > or = 70 years of age (mean 79 +/- 6
years) admitted with documented congestive heart failure.
INTERVENTIONS: Comprehensive multidisciplinary treatment strategy consisting of
intensive teaching by a geriatric cardiac nurse, a detailed review of medications
by a geriatric cardiologist with specific recommendations designed to improve
medication compliance and reduce side effects, early consultation with social
services to facilitate discharge planning, dietary teaching by a hospital
dietician, and close follow-up after discharge by home care and the study team.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: All patients were followed for 90 days after
initial hospital discharge. The primary study endpoints were rehospitalization
within the 90-day interval and the cumulative number of days hospitalized during 
follow-up. The 90-day readmission rate was 33.3% (21.7%-44.9%) for the patients
receiving the study intervention (n = 63) compared with 45.7% (29.2%-62.2%) for
the control patients (n = 35). The mean number of days hospitalized was 4.3 +/-
1.1 (2.1-6.5) for the treated patients vs 5.7 +/- 2.0 (1.8-9.6) for the
usual-care patients. In a prospectively defined subgroup of patients at
intermediate risk for readmission (n = 61), readmissions were reduced by 42.2%
(from 47.6% to 27.5%; p = 0.10), and the average number of hospital days during
follow-up decreased from 6.7 +/- 3.2 days to 3.2 +/- 1.2 days (p = NS).
CONCLUSIONS: These pilot data suggest that a comprehensive, multidisciplinary
approach to reducing repetitive hospitalizations in elderly patients with
congestive heart failure may lead to a reduction in readmissions and hospital
days, particularly in patients at moderate risk for early rehospitalization.
Further evaluation of this treatment strategy, including an assessment of the
cost-effectiveness, is warranted.

PMID: 8289096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Fam Pract. 2014 Aug;63(8):430-8a.

Strategies to help reduce hospital readmissions.

Snyderman D(1), Salzman B, Mills G, Hersh L, Parks S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Email: danielle.snyderman@jefferson.edu.

The risk assessment tools, medication reconciliation steps, and discharge script 
provided here can help you keep your patients from going back into the hospital.

PMID: 25350259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2010 Aug;17(4):393-402. doi:
10.1097/HJR.0b013e328334ea56.

Can a heart failure-specific cardiac rehabilitation program decrease
hospitalizations and improve outcomes in high-risk patients?

Davidson PM(1), Cockburn J, Newton PJ, Webster JK, Betihavas V, Howes L, Owensby 
DO.

Author information: 
(1)Curtin University of Technology, 39 Regent Street, Chippendale, NSW 2008,
Australia. p.davidson@curtin.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Heart failure is a common and costly condition, particularly in the
elderly. A range of models of interventions have shown the capacity to decrease
hospitalizations and improve health-related outcomes. Potentially, cardiac
rehabilitation models can also improve outcomes.
AIM: To assess the impact of a nurse-coordinated multidisciplinary, cardiac
rehabilitation program to decrease hospitalizations, increase functional
capacity, and meet the needs of patients with heart failure.
METHOD: In a randomized control trial, a total of 105 patients were recruited to 
the study. Patients in the intervention group received an individualized,
multidisciplinary 12-week cardiac rehabilitation program, including an
individualized exercise component tailored to functional ability and social
circumstances. The control group received an information session provided by the 
cardiac rehabilitation coordinator and then follow-up care by either their
cardiologist or general practitioner. This trial was stopped prematurely after
the release of state-based guidelines and funding for heart failure programs.
RESULTS: During the study period, patients in the intervention group were less
likely to have been admitted to hospital for any cause (44 vs. 69%, P = 0.01) or 
after a major acute coronary event (24 vs. 55%, P = 0.001). Participants in the
intervention group were more likely to be alive at 12 months, (93 vs. 79%; P =
0.03) (odds ratio = 3.85; 95% confidence interval=1.03-14.42; P = 0.0042).
Quality of life scores improved at 3 months compared with baseline (intervention 
t = o/-4.37, P<0.0001; control t = /-3.52, P<0.01). Improvement was also seen in 
6-min walk times at 3 months compared with baseline in the intervention group (t 
= 3.40; P = 0.01).
CONCLUSION: This study shows that a multidisciplinary heart failure cardiac
rehabilitation program, including an individualized exercise component,
coordinated by a specialist heart failure nurse can substantially reduce both
all-cause and cardiovascular readmission rates, improve functional status at 3
months and exercise tolerance.

PMID: 20498608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am Heart J. 2008 Oct;156(4):728-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2008.05.033.

Clinical characteristics associated with poor long-term survival among patients
with diabetes mellitus undergoing saphenous vein graft interventions.

Mehta RH(1), Honeycutt E, Shaw LK, Sketch MH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. mehta007@dcri.duke.edu

BACKGROUND: Limited data exist on the long-term outcomes among diabetic patients 
undergoing saphenous vein graft (SVG) interventions. Thus, the baseline clinical 
factors associated with long-term adverse events in these patients are less
known.
METHODS: Accordingly, we analyzed 1,160 consecutive patients (37.7% with
diabetes) undergoing SVG interventions from the Duke Cardiovascular Disease
Database (1990-2003). Cox proportional hazards modeling was used to identify
predictors of long-term death in diabetic patients. The most significant model
predictors were then used to construct a decision tree providing unadjusted
Kaplan-Meier survival estimates at a median follow-up of 4 years.
RESULTS: At median follow-up of 4 years, death (33.3% vs 18.1%, P < .0001;
unadjusted hazard ratio 1.98, 95% CI 1.64-2.38) and death or myocardial
infarction (49.6% vs 32.9%, unadjusted hazard ratio 1.71, 95% CI 1.462.00) were
significantly higher in patients with diabetes mellitus compared with those
without it. In patients with diabetes undergoing SVG interventions, a simple
clinical decision algorithm, based on the most significant model predictors,
demonstrated that 88% of patients without heart rate >80 beat/min, congestive
heart failure, renal insufficiency, or hypertension survived after SVG
intervention at median follow-up of 4 years. In contrast, none of the few
patients with all these 4 factors survived at follow-up (100% mortality).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with patients without diabetes, diabetic patients
undergoing SVG intervention have significantly worse long-term outcomes with one 
third dying at median follow-up of 4 years. We provide a simple decision tool
that allows stepwise risk-stratification using baseline factors in diabetic
patients undergoing SVG interventions and identify 4 risk factors associated with
extremely poor long-term survival in this cohort.

PMID: 18926154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Health Serv Res. 2013 Dec;48(6 Pt 1):1978-95. doi: 10.1111/1475-6773.12075. Epub 
2013 Jun 6.

Implications of metric choice for common applications of readmission metrics.

Davies S(1), Saynina O, Schultz E, McDonald KM, Baker LC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research, Stanford School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA.

OBJECTIVE: To quantify the differential impact on hospital performance of three
readmission metrics: all-cause readmission (ACR), 3M Potential Preventable
Readmission (PPR), and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 30-day readmission
(CMS).
DATA SOURCES: 2000-2009 California Office of Statewide Health Planning and
Development Patient Discharge Data Nonpublic file.
STUDY DESIGN: We calculated 30-day readmission rates using three metrics, for
three disease groups: heart failure (HF), acute myocardial infarction (AMI), and 
pneumonia. Using each metric, we calculated the absolute change and correlation
between performance; the percent of hospitals remaining in extreme deciles and
level of agreement; and differences in longitudinal performance.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Average hospital rates for HF patients and the CMS metric
were generally higher than for other conditions and metrics. Correlations between
the ACR and CMS metrics were highest (r = 0.67-0.84). Rates calculated using the 
PPR and either ACR or CMS metrics were moderately correlated (r = 0.50-0.67).
Between 47 and 75 percent of hospitals in an extreme decile according to one
metric remained when using a different metric. Correlations among metrics were
modest when measuring hospital longitudinal change.
CONCLUSIONS: Different approaches to computing readmissions can produce different
hospital rankings and impact pay-for-performance. Careful consideration should be
placed on readmission metric choice for these applications.

© Health Research and Educational Trust.

PMCID: PMC3876390
PMID: 23742056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005 May 17;45(10):1654-64. Epub 2005 Apr 22.

Noninvasive home telemonitoring for patients with heart failure at high risk of
recurrent admission and death: the Trans-European Network-Home-Care Management
System (TEN-HMS) study.

Cleland JG(1), Louis AA, Rigby AS, Janssens U, Balk AH; TEN-HMS Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Hull, Kingston Upon Hull, United
Kingdom. j.g.cleland@hull.ac.uk

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Aug 15;48(4):850; author reply 851-2.
    Evid Based Cardiovasc Med. 2005 Dec;9(4):322-5.
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005 May 17;45(10):1665-6.
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Aug 15;48(4):850-1; author reply 851-2.

OBJECTIVES: We sought to identify whether home telemonitoring (HTM) improves
outcomes compared with nurse telephone support (NTS) and usual care (UC) for
patients with heart failure who are at high risk of hospitalization or death.
BACKGROUND: Heart failure is associated with a high rate of hospitalization and
poor prognosis. Telemonitoring could help implement and maintain effective
therapy and detect worsening heart failure and its cause promptly to prevent
medical crises.
METHODS: Patients with a recent admission for heart failure and left ventricular 
ejection fraction (LVEF) <40% were assigned randomly to HTM, NTS, or UC in a
2:2:1 ratio. HTM consisted of twice-daily patient self-measurement of weight,
blood pressure, heart rate, and rhythm with automated devices linked to a
cardiology center. The NTS consisted of specialist nurses who were available to
patients by telephone. Primary care physicians delivered UC. The primary end
point was days dead or hospitalized with NTS versus HTM at 240 days.
RESULTS: Of 426 patients randomly assigned, 48% were aged >70 years, mean LVEF
was 25% (SD, 8) and median plasma N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide was
3,070 pg/ml (interquartile range 1,285 to 6,749 pg/ml). During 240 days of
follow-up, 19.5%, 15.9%, and 12.7% of days were lost as the result of death or
hospitalization for UC, NTS, and HTM, respectively (no significant difference).
The number of admissions and mortality were similar among patients randomly
assigned to NTS or HTM, but the mean duration of admissions was reduced by 6 days
(95% confidence interval 1 to 11) with HTM. Patients randomly assigned to receive
UC had higher one-year mortality (45%) than patients assigned to receive NTS
(27%) or HTM (29%) (p = 0.032).
CONCLUSIONS: Further investigation and refinement of the application of HTM are
warranted because it may be a valuable role for the management of selected
patients with heart failure.

PMID: 15893183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2014 Sep;7(5):749-56. doi:
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.113.000911. Epub 2014 Jul 29.

Place of residence and outcomes of patients with heart failure: analysis from the
telemonitoring to improve heart failure outcomes trial.

Bikdeli B(1), Wayda B(1), Bao H(1), Ross JS(1), Xu X(1), Chaudhry SI(1), Spertus 
JA(1), Bernheim SM(1), Lindenauer PK(1), Krumholz HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Yale-New Haven Hospital,
CT (B.B., B.W., H.B., J.S.R., X.X., S.I.C., S.M.B., H.M.K.); Section of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine (B.B., H.M.K.), Section 
of General Internal Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine (J.S.R., S.I.C.,
S.M.B.), Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences (X.X.), 
Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program, Department of Internal Medicine
(H.M.K., J.S.R.), Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Saint Luke's
Mid America Heart Institute/University of Missouri-Kansas City (J.A.S.);
Department of Medicine, Center for Quality of Care Research, Baystate Medical
Center, Springfield, MA (P.K.L.); Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
(P.K.L.); and Department of Health Policy and Management, Yale School of Public
Health, New Haven, CT (H.M.K., J.S.R.). (2)From the Center for Outcomes Research 
and Evaluation, Yale-New Haven Hospital, CT (B.B., B.W., H.B., J.S.R., X.X.,
S.I.C., S.M.B., H.M.K.); Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine (B.B., H.M.K.), Section of General Internal Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine (J.S.R., S.I.C., S.M.B.), Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences (X.X.), Robert Wood Johnson
Clinical Scholars Program, Department of Internal Medicine (H.M.K., J.S.R.), Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Saint Luke's Mid America Heart
Institute/University of Missouri-Kansas City (J.A.S.); Department of Medicine,
Center for Quality of Care Research, Baystate Medical Center, Springfield, MA
(P.K.L.); Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA (P.K.L.); and
Department of Health Policy and Management, Yale School of Public Health, New
Haven, CT (H.M.K., J.S.R.). harlan.krumholz@yale.edu.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies show an association between neighborhood-level
measures of socioeconomic status (SES) and outcomes for patients with heart
failure. We do not know whether neighborhood SES has a primary effect or is a
marker for individual SES.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used the data from participants of the Telemonitoring to 
Improve Heart Failure Outcomes (Tele-HF) trial, recruited from 33 US internal
medicine and cardiology practices and examined the association between
neighborhood SES and outcomes of patients with heart failure. We used census
tracts as proxies for neighborhoods and constructed summary SES scores that
included information about wealth and income, education, and occupation. The
primary end points were readmission and all-cause mortality at 6 months. We
conducted patient interviews and medical chart reviews to obtain demographic
information, clinical factors, therapies, and individual SES. We included 1557
patients: 524, 516, and 517 from low, medium, and high SES neighborhoods,
respectively (mean age, 61.1±15.2 years; 42.2% women).Overall, 745 patients
(47.8%) had ≥1 readmission and 179 patients (11.5%) died. When compared with
patients in high SES neighborhoods, those living in low-SES neighborhoods were
more likely to be readmitted (odds ratio, 1.35; 95% confidence interval,
1.01-1.82), but the mortality rates were not significantly different (odds ratio,
0.78; 95% confidence interval, 0.50-1.18). The results were consistent after
multivariable adjustments for individual demographics, clinical factors, and
individual SES.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with heart failure, neighborhood SES was
significantly associated with 6-month all-cause readmission even after adjusting 
for other patient-level factors, including individual SES. Greater number of
events and longer follow-up is required to ascertain the potential effect of
neighborhood SES on mortality.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION URL: http://clinicaltrials.gov/. Unique identifier:
NCT00303212.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25074375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 15;168(6):5316-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.08.009.
Epub 2013 Aug 15.

Coronary artery bypass grafting in patients with left ventricular dysfunction:
predictors of long-term survival and impact of surgical strategies.

Yoo JS(1), Kim JB, Jung SH, Choo SJ, Chung CH, Lee JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Asan Medical Center,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: In the surgical management of ischemic cardiomyopathy, factors
associated with long-term prognosis after coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) 
in patients with severe left ventricular (LV) dysfunction are poorly understood. 
This study aimed to determine predictors of clinical outcomes in patients with
severe LV dysfunction undergoing CABG.
METHODS: Out of 6084 patients who underwent CABG between 1997 and 2011, 476
patients (aged 62.6 ± 9.3 years, 100 females) were identified as having severe LV
dysfunction (ejection fraction ≤ 35%), preoperatively. All-cause mortality and
adverse cardiac events (myocardial infarction, repeat revascularization, stroke
and hospitalization due to cardiovascular causes) were evaluated during a median 
follow-up period of 55.2 months (inter-quartile range: 26.4-94.8 months).
RESULTS: During the follow-up, 187 patients (39.3%) died and 126 cardiac events
occurred in 104 patients (21.8%). Five-year survival and event-free survival
rates were 72.1 ± 2.2% and 61.3 ± 2.4%, respectively. On Cox-regression analysis,
old age (P < 0.001), recent MI (P < 0.001), history of coronary stenting (P =
0.023), decreased glomerular filtration rate (P < 0.001), and presence of mitral 
regurgitation (≥moderate) (P = 0.012) or LV wall thinning (P = 0.007) emerged as 
significant and independent predictors of death. After adjustment for important
covariates affecting outcomes, none of the pump strategy (off-pump vs. on-pump), 
concomitant mitral surgery or surgical ventricular reconstruction (SVR) affected 
survival or event-free survival (P = 0.082 to >0.99).
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term survival following CABG in patients with severe LV
dysfunction was affected by age, renal function, recent MI, prior coronary
stenting, and presence of mitral regurgitation or LV wall thinning. Neither
concomitant mitral surgery nor SVR, however, had significant influence on
clinical outcomes.

© 2013.

PMID: 23978366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Clin Cardiol. 2013 Sep;36(9):542-7. doi: 10.1002/clc.22180. Epub 2013 Aug 8.

Predictors of 30-day readmission in patients hospitalized with decompensated
heart failure.

Hernandez MB(1), Schwartz RS, Asher CR, Navas EV, Totfalusi V, Buitrago I, Lahoti
A, Novaro GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Florida, Weston, Florida.

BACKGROUND: Heart failure (HF) is the leading cause of hospitalizations and
readmissions in the United States. Approximately one-third of patients admitted
for HF are readmitted within 3 months; however, there are few markers that can
identify those at highest risk for readmission. The purpose of this study was to 
identify clinical and laboratory markers associated with hospital readmission in 
decompensated HF.
HYPOTHESIS: Clinical and laboratory markers are associated with readmission rates
in decompensated HF.
METHODS: Clinical and laboratory data from 412 patients admitted with HF were
analyzed using a multivariable logistic regression analysis to find predictors of
HF readmission by 30 days.
RESULTS: HF readmission rates at 30 days were lowest in those with at least 2 of 
the following discharge criteria: net fluid reduction >1.3 L (odds ratio [OR]:
0.27, P = 0.019), serum sodium level >135 (OR: 0.46, P = 0.034), and N-terminal
brain natriuretic peptide level reduction >23% (OR: 0.11, P = 0.048). In
multivariate analysis, those patients meeting ≥2 criteria had a very low risk of 
30-day readmission (OR: 0.10, 95% confidence interval: 0.01-0.68, P = 0.019)
compared to patients who failed to meet 2 criteria.
CONCLUSIONS: A negative fluid balance, normal serum sodium, and net reduction in 
N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide level during hospitalization may be
important indices to target to help reduce the likelihood of HF readmission
within 30 days.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23929763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Lung. 2005 Jul-Aug;34(4):231-9.

Predictors of hospital readmission after discharge in patients with congestive
heart failure.

Hamner JB(1), Ellison KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Auburn University School of Nursing, Miller Hall, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.

PURPOSE: The purposes of this study were to (1) describe the characteristics of
the population with congestive heart failure (CHF) who were admitted to a large, 
southeastern, acute-care hospital and (2) determine which patients are at risk
for readmissions within 6 months.
METHODS: A descriptive correlational design, using variables maintained in a
computerized data bank on patients with CHF (N = 557, 39% were black) who were
admitted between October 2000 and March 2002, was used to describe the adult
population with CHF and identify variables associated with a likelihood of
readmission.
RESULTS: In the 6 months after the index admission, 224 (40%) of the patients
were readmitted to the hospital for CHF. Variables significantly associated with 
readmission included lack of cardiology consult during admission, living status, 
point of entry of index admission, receiving Medicare, and having pulmonary
hypertension. Four models, composed of subsets of variable from the data bank
were developed and tested with logistic regression. The model composed of
discharge variables was the only model that predicted readmission at a
significant level.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a need to develop comprehensive data banks to describe
patterns of care and their outcomes. Such data should inform plans to manage this
vulnerable population.

PMID: 16027642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Congest Heart Fail. 2005 Mar-Apr;11(2):68-72.

Emergency department observation of heart failure: preliminary analysis of safety
and cost.

Storrow AB(1), Collins SP, Lyons MS, Wagoner LE, Gibler WB, Lindsell CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
45267-0769, USA. alan.storrow@uc.edu

Emergency-department (ED)-based observation-unit treatment has been shown to
reduce inpatient admissions, hospital bed-hours, and costs without adversely
affecting outcomes for several conditions. A sequential group design study
compared risk-matched, acute decompensated heart failure patients admitted
directly to the inpatient setting with those admitted to an ED observation unit
for up to 23 hours before ED disposition. Outcomes were 30-day readmissions or
repeat ED visits for heart failure or 30-day mortality. Estimates of bed-hours
and charges between the groups were compared. Sixty-four patients were enrolled
with 36 inpatient admissions and 28 observation unit patients. No patients died
within 30 days. Observation unit patients had no significant difference in
outcomes, a decrease in time from ED triage to discharge, a saving in mean
bed-hours, and less total charges. This pilot trial provides preliminary data
that suggest admitted, low-risk heart failure patients may be safely and
cost-effectively managed in an ED-based observation unit. These findings need to 
be further evaluated in a randomized clinical trial.

PMID: 15860971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2014 Jan;7(1):12-20. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.000429.
Epub 2013 Dec 2.

Association of heart rate at hospital discharge with mortality and
hospitalizations in patients with heart failure.

Habal MV(1), Liu PP, Austin PC, Ross HJ, Newton GE, Wang X, Tu JV, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Heart failure (HF) is associated with a high burden of morbidity and 
mortality. Hospital discharge is an opportunity for identification of modifiable 
prognostic factors in the transition to chronic HF.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined the association of discharge heart rate with
30-day and 1-year mortality and hospitalization outcomes in a cohort of 9097
patients with HF discharged from hospital. Discharge heart rate was categorized
into predefined groups: 40 to 60 (n=1333), 61 to 70 (n=2170), 71 to 80 (n=2631), 
81 to 90 (n=1700), and >90 bpm (n=1263). There was a significant increase in
all-cause 30-day mortality with adjusted odds ratios of 1.59 (95% confidence
interval [CI], 1.18-2.14; P=0.003) for discharge heart rates 81 to 90 bpm and
1.56 (95% CI, 1.13-2.16; P=0.007) for heart rates>90 bpm when compared with the
reference group (heart rates, 61-70 bpm). Cardiovascular death risk at 30 days
was also higher with adjusted odds ratio 1.59 (discharge heart rates, 81-90 bpm; 
95% CI, 1.09-2.33; P=0.017) and 1.65 (discharge heart rates, >90 bpm; 95% CI,
1.09-2.48; P=0.017). One-year all-cause mortality (adjusted odds ratio, 1.41; 95%
CI, 1.16-1.72; P<0.001) and cardiovascular death (adjusted odds ratio, 1.47; 95% 
CI, 1.12-1.92; P=0.005) were higher with discharge heart rates>90 bpm when
compared with the reference group (heart rates, 40-60 bpm). Readmissions for HF
(adjusted hazard ratio, 1.26; 95% CI, 1.04-1.54; P=0.021) and cardiovascular
disease (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.29; 95% CI, 1.08-1.54; P=0.004) within 30 days 
were also higher with discharge heart rates>90 bpm.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher discharge heart rates were associated with greater risk of
all-cause and cardiovascular mortality≤1-year follow-up and an elevated risk of
30-day readmission for HF and cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 24297690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2014 Dec;11(4):445-52. doi: 10.1007/s11897-014-0215-7.

Outcomes in acute heart failure: 30-day readmission versus death.

McIlvennan CK(1), Allen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Advanced Heart Failure and Transplantation, Division of Cardiology,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, 12631 East 17th Avenue, B130, Aurora, 
CO, 80045, USA, colleen.mcilvennan@ucdenver.edu.

For patients hospitalized with acute heart failure, health policy initiatives in 
the USA have drawn attention to 30-day mortality and readmission. Confusion
around definitions, populations, and thus reported rates for these two outcomes
is common. Among Medicare fee-for-service patients hospitalized with heart
failure, all-cause mortality 30 days from the time of admission is 11.7 % and
all-cause unplanned readmission 30 days from discharge is 23.0 %. Rates for
Medicaid and commercially insured patients are lower. Mortality rates have been
relatively stable, while readmission rates increased under the Diagnosis Related 
Group payment system then began decreasing under the Hospital Readmission
Reductions Program. Risk models are reasonable at predicting mortality, whereas
readmission has been harder to anticipate. The use of risk-standardized hospital 
rates as performance measures has generated considerable debate. Future work
should clarify the interaction between the two measures, the optimal time window 
and factors influencing rates and trends-including socioeconomic status.

PMID: 25139630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2010 Apr;12(4):367-74. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfq019. Epub 2010
Mar 1.

Critical elements of clinical follow-up after hospital discharge for heart
failure: insights from the EVEREST trial.

Dunlay SM(1), Gheorghiade M, Reid KJ, Allen LA, Chan PS, Hauptman PJ, Zannad F,
Maggioni AP, Swedberg K, Konstam MA, Spertus JA.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic Rochester, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

AIMS: Hospitalized heart failure (HF) patients are at high risk for death and
readmission. We examined the incremental value of data obtained 1 week after HF
hospital discharge in predicting mortality and readmission.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In the Efficacy of Vasopressin Antagonism in Heart Failure
Outcome Study with tolvaptan, 1528 hospitalized patients (ejection fraction < or 
=40%) with a physical examination, laboratories, and health status [Kansas City
Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ)] assessments 1 week after discharge were
included. The ability to predict 1 year cardiovascular rehospitalization and
mortality was assessed with Cox models, c-statistics, and the integrated
discrimination improvement (IDI). Not using a beta-blocker, rales, pedal oedema, 
hyponatraemia, lower creatinine clearance, higher brain natriuretic peptide, and 
worse health status were independent risk factors for rehospitalization and
death. The c-statistic for the base model (history and medications) was 0.657.
The model improved with physical examination, laboratory, and KCCQ results, with 
IDI increases of 4.9, 7.0, and 3.2%, respectively (P < 0.001 each). The
combination of all three offered the greatest incremental gain (c-statistic
0.749; IDI increase 10.8%).
CONCLUSION: Physical examination, laboratories, and KCCQ assessed 1 week after
discharge offer important prognostic information, suggesting that all are
critical components of outpatient evaluation after HF hospitalization.

PMCID: PMC3732083
PMID: 20197265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Med Pract Manage. 2008 May-Jun;23(6):350-7.

Congestive heart failure admissions: factors related to hospital length of stay.

Velis E(1), Whiteman AS, Caballero GS, Cabrera B, Ortiz S, Ritter J.

Author information: 
(1)MS Health Services Administration, School of Natural and Health Sciences,
Barry University, 11300 NE 2nd Avenue, Miami Shores, FL 33161, USA.
evelis@mail.barry.edu

Congestive heart failure (CHF) is an illness that affects millions of Americans
each year; the cost associated with treatment and care is extensive. This study
was based on a total of 480 patients admitted to the Mercy Hospital in Miami,
Florida, during 2005. Average length of stay was significantly different based
upon type of health insurance, race/ethnicity, marital status, admission source, 
attending physician specialty, discharge disposition, number of consultations
while admitted, surgical procedure, and illness severity. The study results
provide hospital executives with vital information for clinical and
administrative CHF-related admissions management.

PMID: 18616003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Eur J Intern Med. 2009 Dec;20(8):764-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2009.09.010. Epub
2009 Oct 22.

Clinical outcomes in medical outliers admitted to hospital with heart failure.

Alameda C(1), Suárez C.

Author information: 
(1)Briviesca Health Centre, Briviesca, Burgos, Spain.
calamedag@saludcastillayleon.es

BACKGROUND: Due to the lack of beds in medical wards, many patients are placed in
other departments' wards (usually in surgical wards). These patients are called
"medical outliers". This is a common problem in countries with public national
health services. We determined whether location influences progress and prognosis
of patients.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study in a public university hospital in
Madrid, Spain. 243 patients discharged from the Department of Internal Medicine
during 2006 with the same diagnosis-related group (DRG) (congestive heart failure
and cardiac arrhythmia with major complications or comorbidity) were studied.
Patients admitted to departments other than the Internal Medicine department or
Intensive Care Unit were excluded. "Medical outlier" was defined as a patient
admitted to a ward different from the Internal Medicine ward. Medical outliers
transferred to the Internal Medicine ward were not excluded.
RESULTS: 109 (45%) patients were medical outliers. They had a longer stay in
hospital (mean difference 2.6 days, 95% confidence interval 0.6-4.7) but with no 
statistically significant differences in mortality, readmission, or
intra-hospital morbidity. These patterns persisted after control for confounding 
in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Patients admitted to the Department of Internal Medicine with heart
failure had a longer stay if they initially start in other departments' wards.
Significant differences were not seen in this group of patients with respect to
mortality, readmission, or intra-hospital morbidity.

PMID: 19892305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2011 May;4(5):569-76. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2011.01.010.

30-day readmissions after coronary artery bypass graft surgery in New York State.

Hannan EL(1), Zhong Y, Lahey SJ, Culliford AT, Gold JP, Smith CR, Higgins RS,
Jordan D, Wechsler A.

Author information: 
(1)University at Albany, State University of New York, Albany 12144-3456, USA.
elh03@health.state.ny.us

Comment in
    JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2011 May;4(5):577-8.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to identify reasons for and predictors of
readmission.
BACKGROUND: Short-term readmissions have been identified as an important cause of
escalating health care costs, and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery is 
1 of the most expensive procedures.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 30-day readmissions for 33,936 New York
State patients who underwent CABG surgery between January 1, 2005, and November
30, 2007. The main reasons for readmission (principal diagnoses) and the
significant independent predictors of readmission were identified. The
hospital-level relationship between risk-adjusted mortality rate and
risk-adjusted readmission rate was explored to determine the value of readmission
rate as a complementary measure of quality.
RESULTS: The most common reasons for readmission were post-operative infection
(16.9%), heart failure (12.8%), and "other complications of surgical and medical 
care" (9.8%). Increasing age, female sex, African-American race, higher body mass
index, numerous comorbidities, 2 post-operative complications (renal failure and 
unplanned cardiac reoperation), Medicare or Medicaid status, discharges to a
skilled nursing facility, saphenous vein grafts, and longer lengths of stay were 
all associated with higher rates of readmission. The correlation between the
risk-adjusted 30-day readmission rate of hospitals and risk-adjusted
in-hospital/30-day mortality rate was 0.32 (p = 0.047). The range across
hospitals in the readmission rate was from 8.3% to 21.1%.
CONCLUSIONS: The 30-day readmission rate for CABG surgery remains high, despite
decreases in short-term mortality. Patients with any of the numerous risk factors
for readmission should be closely monitored. Hospital readmission rates are not
highly correlated with mortality rates and might serve as an independent quality 
measure.

Copyright © 2011 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21596331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Med Care. 2013 Jul;51(7):589-96. doi: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e31829019a4.

Comparing 2 methods of assessing 30-day readmissions: what is the impact on
hospital profiling in the veterans health administration?

Mull HJ(1), Chen Q, O'Brien WJ, Shwartz M, Borzecki AM, Hanchate A, Rosen AK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Organization, Leadership, and Management Research (COLMR), VA
Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services' (CMS) all-cause
readmission measure and the 3M Health Information System Division Potentially
Preventable Readmissions (PPR) measure are both used for public reporting. These 
2 methods have not been directly compared in terms of how they identify
high-performing and low-performing hospitals.
OBJECTIVES: To examine how consistently the CMS and PPR methods identify
performance outliers, and explore how the PPR preventability component impacts
hospital readmission rates, public reporting on CMS' Hospital Compare website,
and pay-for-performance under CMS' Hospital Readmission Reduction Program for 3
conditions (acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, and pneumonia).
METHODS: We applied the CMS all-cause model and the PPR software to VA
administrative data to calculate 30-day observed FY08-10 VA hospital readmission 
rates and hospital profiles. We then tested the effect of preventability on
hospital readmission rates and outlier identification for reporting and
pay-for-performance by replacing the dependent variable in the CMS all-cause
model (Yes/No readmission) with the dichotomous PPR outcome (Yes/No preventable
readmission).
RESULTS: The CMS and PPR methods had moderate correlations in readmission rates
for each condition. After controlling for all methodological differences but
preventability, correlations increased to >90%. The assessment of preventability 
yielded different outlier results for public reporting in 7% of hospitals; for
30% of hospitals there would be an impact on Hospital Readmission Reduction
Program reimbursement rates.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite uncertainty over which readmission measure is superior in
evaluating hospital performance, we confirmed that there are differences in
CMS-generated and PPR-generated hospital profiles for reporting and
pay-for-performance, because of methodological differences and the PPR's
preventability component.

PMID: 23604016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Physiother. 2013 Sep;59(3):177-87. doi: 10.1016/S1836-9553(13)70182-6.

Distance covered during a six-minute walk test predicts long-term cardiovascular 
mortality and hospitalisation rates in men with systolic heart failure: an
observational study.

Wegrzynowska-Teodorczyk K(1), Rudzinska E, Lazorczyk M, Nowakowska K, Banasiak W,
Ponikowski P, Wozniewski M, Jankowska EA.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Physiotherapy, University School of Physical Education, Poland.
kinga.teodorczyk@o2.pl

QUESTION: Does the distance covered during a 6-minute walk test predict risk of
death or hospitalisation for cardiovascular reasons in men with stable heart
failure over three years of follow-up?
DESIGN: Prospective observational study.
PARTICIPANTS: 243 men with stable systolic heart failure, with a mean age of 60
yr (SD 11) and left ventricular ejection fraction of 29% (SD 8). According to the
New York Heart Association (NYHA) classification, 15% of the participants were in
Class I, 44% in Class II, 37% in Class III, and 4% in class IV.
OUTCOME MEASURES: The exercise capacity of participants was measured using the
6-minute walk test. The participants were followed up for at least three years in
the case of survivors. The primary end-points of the survival analyses included
cardiovascular death or urgent cardiovascular hospitalisation.
RESULTS: During the 3-year follow-up, 44% of the participants died, and 69% died 
or required hospitalisation for cardiovascular reasons. A multivariate analysis
showed that the shorter the distance covered in the 6-minute walk test, the
greater the 1-year and 3-year mortality risk. Participants with a 6-minute walk
test ≤ 468 m had a mortality hazard ratio of 3.22 (95% CI 1.17 to 8.86) at one
year and 2.18 (95% CI 1.18 to 4.03) at three years. Multivariate analysis also
showed that higher risk mortality or hospitalisation for cardiovascular reasons
was predicted by a 6-minute walk distance ≤ 468m, with a hazard ratio of 2.77
(95% CI 1.30 to 5.88) at one year and 1.71 (95% CI 1.08 to 2.72) at three years.
CONCLUSION: The 6-minute walk test distance constitutes an independent predictor 
of mortality and mortality or hospitalisation for cardiovascular reasons in men
with stable systolic heart failure.

Copyright © 2013 Australian Physiotherapy Association. Published by .. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 23896333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Rev Port Cardiol. 1999 Sep;18(9):855-6.

Prediction of hospital readmission for heart failure: development of a simple
risk score based on administrative data.

Rocha E.

PMID: 10610100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Heart Fail. 2013 Sep 1;6(5):922-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.000336.
Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Postdischarge outcomes in heart failure are better for teaching hospitals and
weekday discharges.

McAlister FA(1), Au AG, Majumdar SR, Youngson E, Padwal RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, and Patient Health Outcomes Research
and Clinical Effectiveness Unit, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

BACKGROUND: It is unclear whether teaching status or day of discharge influences 
outcomes after a heart failure hospitalization.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We evaluated adults discharged after a heart failure
hospitalization between 1999 and 2009 in Alberta, Canada. The primary outcome was
death or nonelective readmission 30 days postdischarge. Of 12 216 patients
discharged from teaching hospitals and 12 157 patients from nonteaching
hospitals, 20 524 (84%) discharges occurred on weekdays. Although they had
greater comorbidity and used more healthcare resources before their heart failure
hospitalization, patients discharged from teaching hospitals exhibited shorter
lengths of stay (adjusted ratio, 0.83; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.80-0.86)
and significantly lower rates of death or readmission in the 30 days after
discharge than those discharged from nonteaching hospitals (17.4% versus 22.1%;
adjusted hazard ratio [aHR], 0.83; 95% CI, 0.77-0.89). Patients discharged on
weekdays were older and had greater comorbidity, yet exhibited significantly
lower rates of death or readmission at 30 days than those discharged on weekends 
(19.5% versus 21.1%; aHR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.80-0.94). Compared with weekend
discharge from a nonteaching hospital, 30-day death/readmission rates were lower 
for weekday discharge from a nonteaching hospital (aHR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.77-0.94),
weekend discharge from a teaching hospital (aHR, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.69-0.92), and
weekday discharge from a teaching hospital (aHR, 0.71, 95% CI, 0.63-0.79).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients discharged from teaching hospitals or on weekdays exhibited
better outcomes despite having higher risk profiles. Future studies should focus 
on distinguishing which discharge processes differ between teaching and
nonteaching hospitals and between weekdays and weekends to define those that
optimize patient outcomes.

PMID: 23811962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JAMA. 2012 Nov 28;308(20):2097-107. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.14795.

Associations between aldosterone antagonist therapy and risks of mortality and
readmission among patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction.

Hernandez AF(1), Mi X, Hammill BG, Hammill SC, Heidenreich PA, Masoudi FA, Qualls
LG, Peterson ED, Fonarow GC, Curtis LH.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, 
North Carolina 27715, USA. adrian.hernandez@duke.edu

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013 Feb;10(2):60.
    JAMA. 2012 Nov 28;308(20):2144-6.

CONTEXT: Aldosterone antagonist therapy for heart failure and reduced ejection
fraction has been highly efficacious in randomized trials. However, questions
remain regarding the effectiveness and safety of the therapy in clinical
practice.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the clinical effectiveness of newly initiated aldosterone
antagonist therapy among older patients hospitalized with heart failure and
reduced ejection fraction.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Using clinical registry data linked to
Medicare claims from 2005 through 2010, we examined outcomes of eligible patients
hospitalized with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. We used Cox
proportional hazards models and inverse-weighted estimates of the probability of 
treatment to adjust for treatment selection bias.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: All-cause mortality, cardiovascular readmission, and heart
failure readmission at 3 years, and hyperkalemia readmission at 30 days and 1
year.
RESULTS: Among 5887 patients who met the inclusion criteria, the mean age was
77.6 years; of those 1070 (18.2%) started aldosterone antagonist therapy at
discharge. Cumulative incidence rates among treated and untreated patients were
49.9% vs 51.2% (P = .62) for mortality; 63.8% vs 63.9% (P = .65) for
cardiovascular readmission; and 38.7% vs 44.9% (P < .001) for heart failure
readmission at 3 years; and 2.9% vs 1.2% (P < .001) for hyperkalemia readmission 
within 30 days and 8.9% vs 6.3% (P = .002) within 1 year. After inverse weighting
for the probability of treatment, there were no significant differences in
mortality (hazard ratio [HR], 1.04; 95% CI, 0.96-1.14; P = .32) and
cardiovascular readmission (HR, 1.00; 95% CI, 0.91-1.09; P = .94). Heart failure 
readmission was lower among treated patients at 3 years (HR, 0.87; 95% CI,
0.77-0.98; P = .02). Readmission associated with hyperkalemia was higher with
aldosterone antagonist therapy at 30 days (HR, 2.54; 95% CI, 1.51-4.29; P < .001)
and 1 year (HR, 1.50; 95% CI, 1.23-1.84; P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Initiation of aldosterone antagonist therapy at hospital discharge
was not independently associated with improved mortality or cardiovascular
readmission but was associated with improved heart failure readmission among
eligible older patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. There
was a significant increase in the risk of readmission with hyperkalemia,
predominantly within 30 days after discharge.

PMID: 23188026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Ann Intern Med. 2014 Dec 2;161(11):765-74. doi: 10.7326/M13-2946.

Neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage and 30-day rehospitalization: a
retrospective cohort study.

Kind AJ, Jencks S, Brock J, Yu M, Bartels C, Ehlenbach W, Greenberg C, Smith M.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2014 Dec 2;161(11):833-4.

BACKGROUND: Measures of socioeconomic disadvantage may enable improved targeting 
of programs to prevent rehospitalizations, but obtaining such information
directly from patients can be difficult. Measures of U.S. neighborhood
socioeconomic disadvantage are more readily available but are rarely used
clinically.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between neighborhood socioeconomic
disadvantage at the census block group level, as measured by the Singh validated 
area deprivation index (ADI), and 30-day rehospitalization.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING: United States.
PATIENTS: Random 5% national sample of Medicare patients discharged with
congestive heart failure, pneumonia, or myocardial infarction between 2004 and
2009 (n = 255,744).
MEASUREMENTS: Medicare data were linked to 2000 census data to construct an ADI
for each patient's census block group, which were then sorted into percentiles by
increasing ADI. Relationships between neighborhood ADI grouping and 30-day
rehospitalization were evaluated using multivariate logistic regression models,
controlling for patient sociodemographic characteristics, comorbid conditions and
severity, and index hospital characteristics.
RESULTS: The 30-day rehospitalization rate did not vary significantly across the 
least disadvantaged 85% of neighborhoods, which had an average rehospitalization 
rate of 21%. However, within the most disadvantaged 15% of neighborhoods,
rehospitalization rates increased from 22% to 27% with worsening ADI. This
relationship persisted after full adjustment, with the most disadvantaged
neighborhoods having a rehospitalization risk (adjusted risk ratio, 1.09 [95% CI,
1.05 to 1.12]) similar to that of chronic pulmonary disease (adjusted risk ratio,
1.06 [CI, 1.04 to 1.08]) and greater than that of uncomplicated diabetes
(adjusted risk ratio, 0.95 [CI, 0.94 to 0.97]).
LIMITATION: No direct markers of care quality or access.
CONCLUSION: Residence within a disadvantaged U.S. neighborhood is a
rehospitalization predictor of magnitude similar to chronic pulmonary disease.
Measures of neighborhood disadvantage, such as the ADI, could potentially be used
to inform policy and care after hospital discharge.
PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: National Institute on Aging and University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health's Institute for Clinical and Translational
Research and Health Innovation Program.

PMCID: PMC4251560 [Available on 2015-12-02]
PMID: 25437404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart Lung. 2003 Mar-Apr;32(2):88-99.

Identification of factors predictive of hospital readmissions for patients with
heart failure.

Schwarz KA(1), Elman CS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Akron, College of Nursing, Akron, Ohio 44325, 3701, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The objective was to evaluate whether severity of cardiac illness,
cognitive functioning, and functional health of older adults with heart failure
(HF) and psychosocial factors related to caregiving are predictive of hospital
readmissions for those with HF.
DESIGN: A prospective, descriptive, predictive design was used.
SETTING: The study took place in 2 community hospitals in northeastern Ohio.
SAMPLE: Originally 156 patient-caregiver dyads were interviewed within 7 to 10
days of hospital discharge, but only 128 dyads completed the study. Subjects had 
HF and their mean age was 77.3 years. Their caregivers were mostly women with a
mean age of 64.8 years.
RESULTS: Fourty-four percent of the patients were readmitted to the hospital
within 3 months. Among patients, severity of illness was moderate, blood pressure
was within normal limits, functional and cognitive status were high. For
patients, the interaction of severity of cardiac illness and functional status
predicted risk of hospital readmission. Among caregivers, depressive symptoms and
perceived stress were low; informal social support and caregiving appraisal were 
high. The interaction of caregiver stress and depression were significant
predictors of risk of hospital readmission.
CONCLUSION: Nurses should consistently assess changes in patients' cardiac
symptoms in addition to their ability to provide self-care. Since patients with
HF are at high risk for readmission, further study is needed to determine whether
interventions designed to increase spousal support would decrease hospital
readmissions.

PMID: 12734531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Cardiol. 2012 Jul;60(1):36-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2012.01.020. Epub 2012 Mar
18.

Evaluation of the impact of atrial fibrillation on rehospitalization events in
heart failure patients in recent years.

Murakami M(1), Niwano S, Koitabashi T, Inomata T, Satoh A, Kishihara J, Ishikawa 
S, Aoyama Y, Niwano H, Izumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardio-Angiology, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Kanagawa, Japan. masamim@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    J Cardiol. 2013 Jan;61(1):97.

Comment in
    J Cardiol. 2013 Jan;61(1):95.
    J Cardiol. 2013 Jan;61(1):95-6.

BACKGROUND: Although we have previously reported that the presence of paroxysmal 
atrial fibrillation (AF) is an independent risk factor for rehospitalization in
patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) in a population from 1996 to 2002,
the impact of AF configuration as a risk factor in a more recent population
remains to be clarified.
METHODS AND RESULTS: 319 patients with CHF admitted to our institute in 2006-2007
were retrospectively evaluated. The patients were divided into 3 groups in
accordance with their basic cardiac rhythm, i.e. sinus rhythm (n=210), chronic AF
(n=68), and paroxysmal AF (n=41). During the follow-up period of 19 ± 17 months, 
there was no significant difference in mortality or rehospitalization events
among the 3 groups (p=0.542). In the multivariate analysis, no administration of 
β-blockers was the only independent risk factor for rehospitalization due to CHF 
exacerbation.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical impact of AF configuration as a risk factor of
rehospitalization due to CHF exacerbation was considered to be decreased in
recent years.

Copyright © 2012 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22429679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Card Fail. 2013 Jan;19(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2012.11.007.

A randomized controlled pilot study of outcomes of strict allowance of fluid
therapy in hyponatremic heart failure (SALT-HF).

Albert NM(1), Nutter B, Forney J, Slifcak E, Tang WH.

Author information: 
(1)Nursing Research and Innovation, Nursing Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA. albertn@ccf.org

BACKGROUND: Currently, fluid restriction recommendations in heart failure (HF)
are based on expert opinion. After implementing a 1,000-mL/d fluid restriction
for 60 days after discharge, outcomes were examined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In a randomized controlled design, hyponatremic patients
(serum sodium ≤137 mg/dL) received usual care (UC; n = 26) or 1,000 mL/d fluid
restriction (n = 20) at discharge. Quality of life (QoL), thirst, difficulty
following fluid recommendations, adherence to fluid restriction, HF emergency
care, HF rehospitalization, and all-cause death were examined. Mean age was
62.8 ± 12.8 years; 46% were white. There were no differences by group in baseline
demographics, comorbidities, and QoL, except that more UC patients had New York
Heart Association (NYHA) functional class III/IV status (P = .019). Median
[interquartile range] QoL scores were better in the 1,000 mL/d group for symptom 
burden (83.3 [68.8-91.7] vs 50 [29.2-79.2]; P = .018), total symptoms (77.1
[58.1-91.7] vs 54.2 [30.2-73.9]; P = .022), overall QoL summary (72.6 [52.2-86.3]
vs 51.0 [37.7-68.5]; P = .038), and clinical QoL summary (75.5 [57.8-92.9] vs
59.1 [35.7-77.3]; P = .039). There were no group differences in thirst,
difficulty adhering to fluid recommendations, adherence to fluid restriction, or 
health care consumption.
CONCLUSIONS: The 1,000 mL/d fluid restriction led to improved QoL at 60 days
after discharge. Future research in a larger more heterogeneous sample is needed.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23273588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am Heart J. 2014 Jun;167(6):853-60.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2014.02.011. Epub 2014 
Mar 5.

Elevated plasma galectin-3 is associated with near-term rehospitalization in
heart failure: a pooled analysis of 3 clinical trials.

Meijers WC(1), Januzzi JL(2), deFilippi C(3), Adourian AS(4), Shah SJ(5), van
Veldhuisen DJ(1), de Boer RA(6).

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, Medical Center Groningen, Department of Cardiology,
Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Division of
Cardiology, Boston, MA. (3)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Department 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. (4)BG Medicine, Waltham, MA. (5)Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Chicago, IL.
(6)University of Groningen, Medical Center Groningen, Department of Cardiology,
Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: r.a.de.boer@umcg.nl.

BACKGROUND: Rehospitalization is a major cause for heart failure (HF)-related
morbidity and is associated with considerable loss of quality of life and costs. 
The rate of unplanned rehospitalization in patients with HF is unacceptably high;
current risk stratification to identify patients at risk for rehospitalization is
inadequate. We evaluated whether measurement of galectin-3 would be helpful in
identifying patients at such risk.
METHODS: We analyzed pooled data from patients (n = 902) enrolled in 3 cohorts
(COACH, n = 592; PRIDE, n = 181; and UMD H-23258, n = 129) originally admitted
because of HF. Mean patient age was between 61.6 and 72.9 years across the
cohorts, with a wide range of left ventricular ejection fraction. Galectin-3
levels were measured during index admission. We used fixed and random-effects
models, as well as continuous and categorical reclassification statistics to
assess the association of baseline galectin-3 levels with risk of postdischarge
rehospitalization at different time points and the composite end point all-cause 
mortality and rehospitalization.
RESULTS: Compared with patients with galectin-3 concentrations less than 17.8
ng/mL, those with results exceeding this value were significantly more likely to 
be rehospitalized for HF at 30, 60, 90, and 120 days after discharge, with odds
ratios (ORs) of 2.80 (95% CI 1.41-5.57), 2.61 (95% CI 1.46-4.65), 3.01 (95% CI
1.79-5.05), and 2.79 (95% CI 1.75-4.45), respectively. After adjustment for age, 
gender, New York Heart Association class, renal function (estimated glomerular
filtration rate), left ventricular ejection fraction, and B-type natriuretic
peptide, galectin-3 remained an independent predictor of HF rehospitalization.
The addition of galectin-3 to risk models significantly reclassified patient risk
of postdischarge rehospitalization and fatal event at each time point (continuous
net reclassification improvement at 30 days of +42.6% [95% CI +19.9%-65.4%], P < 
.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients hospitalized for HF, plasma galectin-3 concentration 
is useful for the prediction of near-term rehospitalization.

Copyright © 2014 The Author. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24890535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Ir J Med Sci. 2009 Jun;178(2):167-71. doi: 10.1007/s11845-009-0332-6. Epub 2009
May 1.

Can we reduce preventable heart failure readmissions in patients enrolled in a
Disease Management Programme?

Phelan D(1), Smyth L, Ryder M, Murphy N, O'Loughlin C, Conlon C, Ledwidge M,
McDonald K.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Unit, St Vincent's University Hospital, Elm Park, Dublin 4,
Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Disease Management Programmes (DMPs) are successful in reducing
hospital readmissions in heart failure (HF). However, there remain a number of
patients enrolled in a DMP who are readmitted with HF. The primary aim of the
study was to determine the proportion of preventable readmissions (PR). The
secondary aim was to recognise patient characteristics which would identify
certain patients at risk of having a PR.
METHODS: A retrospective chart search was performed on patients readmitted over a
1-year period.
RESULTS: 38.5% of readmissions were classified as PR. None of these patients made
prior contact with the DMP. Admission levels of BNP, potassium, urea and
creatinine were significantly lower in the PR group.
CONCLUSION: DMP have proven benefits in reducing hospital readmission nonetheless
a significant proportion of these readmissions are preventable. Further work is
required to prospectively analyse why these patients fail to contact the DMP.

PMID: 19408042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 7;363(15):1419-28. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0912613.

Rolofylline, an adenosine A1-receptor antagonist, in acute heart failure.

Massie BM(1), O'Connor CM, Metra M, Ponikowski P, Teerlink JR, Cotter G,
Weatherley BD, Cleland JG, Givertz MM, Voors A, DeLucca P, Mansoor GA, Salerno
CM, Bloomfield DM, Dittrich HC; PROTECT Investigators and Committees.

Collaborators: O'Connor CM, Massie BM, Bloomfield D, Cotter G, Dittrich HC, Metra
M, Ponikowski P, Teerlink J, Weatherley B, Borer J, Blantz R, Fleming T, Gorelick
P, Komajda M, McMurray J, Rothrock J, Swedberg K, Teerlink JR, Carson P, Hauptman
P, Iragui V, Lovett D, Miller A, Mohr JP, Pina I, Thomson S, Varosy P, Zile M,
O'Connor CM, Cleland J, Givertz M, Ponikowski P, Voors A, Adams K, Böhm M,
Cleland J, Fillipatos G, Givertz M, Gottlieb S, Grinfeld L, Gupta D, Jondeau G,
Lotan C, Mareev V, Parker J, Ruda M, Špinar J, Tang W, Torre-Amione G, Jorde U,
Voors A, Werdan K, Allall O, Amuchastegui M, Caccavo A, Colque R, Diez M, Ferrari
G, Goicoechea R, Guzman L, Masuelli MG, Perna E, Ramos MS, Quiroga A, Convens C, 
El Allaf D, Goethals M, Nellessen E, Van Mieghem W, Ducharme A, Ezekowitz J,
Haddad H, Klinke P, Lepage S, Parker J, Rajda M, Sussex B, Belohlavek J, Herold
M, Hutyra M, Janek B, Jansky P, Solar M, Spinar J, Spinarova L, Cohen-Solal A,
Funck F, Galinier M, Jondeau G, Habib G, Isnard R, Trochu JN, Böhm M, Felix S,
Hengstenberg C, Olbrich HG, Mirtovic V, Stangl K, Weil J, Werdan K, Zotz R,
Forster T, Keltai M, Kovács Z, Lupkovics G, Tomcsányi J, Tóth K, Aronson D,
Butnaru A, Fink G, Hershkoviz R, Katz A, Lewis B, Lotan C, Marmor A, Omary M,
Reisin L, Weiss T, Zahger D, Zeltser D, Zimlichman R, Balbi M, Gronda E, Metra M,
Bellersen L, Cornel JH, Götte M, Herrman JP, Heymans S, Lenderink T,
Schroeder-Tanka J, Voors A, Withagen A, Dluzniewski M, Grzybowski J,
Kawecka-Jaszcz K, Kopaczewski J, Korzeniowska J, Krzeminska-Pakula M, Kuc K,
Ponikowski P, Prokopczuk J, Stepinska J, Szelemej R, Tracz W, Trusz-Gluza M,
Wysokinski A, Arutyunov G, Boldueva S, Gratsiansky N, Lusov V, Mareev V, Moiseev 
V, Novikova N, Petrov A, Ruda M, Shlyakhto E, Simanenkov V, Tereschenko S,
Tyurina T, Vasilieva E, Yakusevich V, Zadionchenko V, Zateyshchikov D, Amosova K,
Faynyk A, Sirenko Y, Dorobantu M, Georgescu CA, Ionescu DD, Macarie CE, Salajan
AM, Stamate CS, Stefanescu M, Vinereanu D, Billberg EB, Dahlström U, Fu M,
Banerjee P, Cleland J, Memon A, Senior R, Adams K, Ambrosia A, Bart B, Bensimhon 
D, Bilsker M, Bourge R, Bozkurt B, Cabuay B, Chandrasekaran S, Chiong J, Chung E,
Colvin-Adams M, Czerska B, Dunlap M, Farr MJ, Fowler M, Givertz M, Greenberg B,
Greenspan M, Gupta D, Hauptman P, Karia D, Klapholz M, Martinez-Arraras J, Mather
P, McGrew F, Meymandi S, Miller A, Murali S, Murray D, Naz T, Oren R, Ouyang P,
Rubinstein D, Saleh N, Shah M, Smull D, Van Bakel A, Vossler M, Walsh M, Wencker 
D, Winchester M, Zakhary B, Zolty R.

BACKGROUND: Worsening renal function, which is associated with adverse outcomes, 
often develops in patients with acute heart failure. Experimental and clinical
studies suggest that counterregulatory responses mediated by adenosine may be
involved. We tested the hypothesis that the use of rolofylline, an adenosine
A1-receptor antagonist, would improve dyspnea, reduce the risk of worsening renal
function, and lead to a more favorable clinical course in patients with acute
heart failure.
METHODS: We conducted a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving patients hospitalized for acute heart failure with impaired renal
function. Within 24 hours after presentation, 2033 patients were randomly
assigned, in a 2:1 ratio, to receive daily intravenous rolofylline (30 mg) or
placebo for up to 3 days. The primary end point was treatment success, treatment 
failure, or no change in the patient's clinical condition; this end point was
defined according to survival, heart-failure status, and changes in renal
function. Secondary end points were the post-treatment development of persistent 
renal impairment and the 60-day rate of death or readmission for cardiovascular
or renal causes.
RESULTS: Rolofylline, as compared with placebo, did not provide a benefit with
respect to the primary end point (odds ratio, 0.92; 95% confidence interval, 0.78
to 1.09; P=0.35). Persistent renal impairment developed in 15.0% of patients in
the rolofylline group and in 13.7% of patients in the placebo group (P=0.44). By 
60 days, death or readmission for cardiovascular or renal causes had occurred in 
similar proportions of patients assigned to rolofylline and placebo (30.7% and
31.9%, respectively; P=0.86). Adverse-event rates were similar overall; however, 
only patients in the rolofylline group had seizures, a known potential adverse
effect of A1-receptor antagonists.
CONCLUSIONS: Rolofylline did not have a favorable effect with respect to the
primary clinical composite end point, nor did it improve renal function or 60-day
outcomes. It does not show promise in the treatment of acute heart failure with
renal dysfunction. (Funded by NovaCardia, a subsidiary of Merck;
ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT00328692 and NCT00354458.).

PMID: 20925544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2011 May;4(5):577-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2011.04.002.

Reducing readmission rates: Does coronary artery bypass graft surgery provide
clarity?

Rumsfeld JS, Allen LA.

Comment on
    JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2011 May;4(5):569-76.

PMID: 21596332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Home Healthc Nurse. 2001 May;19(5):298-305.

Rehospitalization among home healthcare patients: results of a prospective study.

Madigan EA(1), Schott D, Matthews CR.

Author information: 
(1)Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing, Case Western Reserve University, 10900
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. eam13@po.cwru.edu

Reduction in rehospitalization is an outcome measure used to evaluate home care
services, especially in Outcome Based Quality Management using OASIS data;
however, practitioners and managers must carefully analyze the reasons patients
return to the hospital. This study examines events leading to rehospitalization
of patients with CHF, whether it is possible to determine upon admission which
patients are at risk, and whether the readmissions were necessary and/or
preventable. Among the study's important findings are that half of the patients
developed a new problem that required the rehospitalization. This and other
research outcomes should be considered when analyzing adverse event reports.

PMID: 11985040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Rural Remote Health. 2010 Apr-Jun;10(2):1447. Epub 2010 Jun 8.

Effect of post-discharge follow-up care on re-admissions among US veterans with
congestive heart failure: a rural-urban comparison.

Muus KJ(1), Knudson A, Klug MG, Gokun J, Sarrazin M, Kaboli P.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Dakota Center for Rural Health, Grand Forks, USA.
klmuus@medicine.nodak.edu

INTRODUCTION: Hospital re-admissions for patients with congestive heart failure
(CHF) are relatively common and costly occurrences within the US health
infrastructure, including the Veterans Affairs (VA) healthcare system. Little is 
known about CHF re-admissions among rural veteran patients, including the effects
of socio-demographics and follow-up outpatient visits on these re-admissions.
PURPOSE: To examine socio-demographics of US veterans with CHF who had 30 day
potentially preventable re-admissions and compare the effect of 30 day VA
post-discharge service use on these re-admissions for rural- and urban-dwelling
veterans.
METHODS: The 2005-2007 VA data were analyzed to examine patient characteristics
and hospital admissions for 36 566 veterans with CHF. The CHF patients who were
and were not re-admitted to a VA hospital within 30 days of discharge were
identified. Logistic regression was used to examine and compare the effect of VA 
post-acute service use on re-admissions between rural- and urban-dwelling
veterans.
RESULTS: Re-admitted veterans tended to be older (p=.002), had disability status 
(p=.024) and had longer hospital stays (p<.001). Veterans Affairs follow-up
visits were negatively associated with re-admissions for both rural and urban
veterans with CHF (ORs 0.16-0.76). Rural veterans aged 65 years and older who had
VA emergency room visits following discharge were at high risk for re-admission
(OR=2.66).
CONCLUSIONS: Post-acute follow-up care is an important factor for promoting
recovery and good health among hospitalized veterans with CHF, regardless of
their rural or urban residence. Older, rural veterans with CHF are in need of
special attention for VA discharge planning and follow up with primary care
providers.

PMID: 20536269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 1999 Jul 1;56(13):1339-42.

Impact of pharmacist interventions on hospital readmissions for heart failure.

Rainville EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, Medical Center Hospital of Vermont, Fletcher
Allen Health Care, Burlington, USA.

PMID: 10683133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Med Clin (Barc). 2006 Oct 7;127(13):516-7.

[Management of heart failure in short stay medical unit: mean stay, frequency and
predictors of readmission].

[Article in Spanish]

Muñoz Rivas N, Méndez Bailón M, Conthe Gutiérrez P, Audibert Mena L.

PMID: 17043008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2013 Oct;29(7):1499-509. doi:
10.1007/s10554-013-0239-1. Epub 2013 Jun 4.

Head-to-head comparison of 1 week versus 6 months CMR-derived infarct size for
prediction of late events after STEMI.

Husser O(1), Monmeneu JV, Bonanad C, Gomez C, Chaustre F, Nunez J, Lopez-Lereu
MP, Minana G, Sanchis J, Mainar L, Ruiz V, Forteza MJ, Trapero I, Moratal D,
Chorro FJ, Bodi V.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Department, Hospital Clinico Universitario, INCLIVA, Universidad de
Valencia, Blasco Ibanez 17, 46010, Valencia, Spain, oliver.husser@gmail.com.

Infarct size (IS) at 1 week after ST-elevation myocardial infarction (MI)
diminishes during the first months. The incremental prognostic value of IS
regression and of scar size (SS) at 6 months is unknown. We compared
cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR)-derived IS at 1 week and SS at 6 months
after MI for predicting late major adverse cardiac events (MACE). 250 patients
underwent CMR at 1 week and 6 months after MI. IS and SS were determined as the
extent of transmural late enhancement (in >50 % of wall thickness, ETLE). During 
163 weeks, 23 late MACE (cardiac death, MI or readmission for heart failure after
the 6 months CMR) occurred. Patients with MACE had a larger IS at 1 week (6 [4-9]
vs. 3 [1-5], p < .0001) and a larger SS at 6 months (5 [2-6] vs. 3 [1-5], p =
.005) than those without MACE. Late MACE rates in IS >median were higher at 1
week (14 vs. 4 %, p = .007) and in SS >median at 6 months (12 vs. 5 %, p = .053).
The C-statistic for predicting late MACE of CMR at 1 week and 6 months was
comparable (.720 vs. .746, p = .1). Only ETLE at 1 week (HR 1.31 95 % CI
[1.14-1.52], p < .0001, per segment) independently predicted late MACE.
CMR-derived SS at 6 months does not offer prognostic value beyond IS at 1 week
after MI. The strongest predictor of late MACE is ETLE at 1 week.

PMID: 23733237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. BMJ. 2013 Feb 14;346:f521. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f521.

Income inequality and 30 day outcomes after acute myocardial infarction, heart
failure, and pneumonia: retrospective cohort study.

Lindenauer PK(1), Lagu T, Rothberg MB, Avrunin J, Pekow PS, Wang Y, Krumholz HM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Quality of Care Research, Baystate Medical Center, Springfield, MA 
01199, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the association between income inequality and the risk of 
mortality and readmission within 30 days of hospitalization.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study of Medicare beneficiaries in the United
States. Hierarchical, logistic regression models were developed to estimate the
association between income inequality (measured at the US state level) and a
patient's risk of mortality and readmission, while sequentially controlling for
patient, hospital, other state, and patient socioeconomic characteristics. We
considered a 0.05 unit increase in the Gini coefficient as a measure of income
inequality.
SETTING: US acute care hospitals.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients aged 65 years and older, and hospitalized in 2006-08 with 
a principal diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, or
pneumonia.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Risk of death within 30 days of admission or
rehospitalization for any cause within 30 days of discharge. The potential number
of excess deaths and readmissions associated with higher levels of inequality in 
US states in the three highest quarters of income inequality were compared with
corresponding data in US states in the lowest quarter.
RESULTS: Mortality analyses included 555,962 admissions (4348 hospitals) for
acute myocardial infarction, 1,092,285 (4484) for heart failure, and 1,146,414
(4520); readmission analyses included 553,037 (4262), 1,345,909 (4494), and
1,345,909 (4524) admissions, respectively. In 2006-08, income inequality in US
states (as measured by the average Gini coefficient over three years) varied from
0.41 in Utah to 0.50 in New York. Multilevel models showed no significant
association between income inequality and mortality within 30 days of admission
for patients with acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, or pneumonia. By
contrast, income inequality was associated with rehospitalization (acute
myocardial infarction, risk ratio 1.09 (95% confidence interval 1.03 to 1.15),
heart failure 1.07 (1.01 to 1.12), pneumonia 1.09 (1.03 to 1.15)). Further
adjustment for individual income and educational achievement did not
significantly attenuate these findings. Over the three year period, we estimate
an excess of 7153 (2297 to 11,733) readmissions for acute myocardial infarction, 
17,991 (3410 to 31,772) for heart failure, and 14,127 (4617 to 23,115) for
pneumonia, that are associated with inequality levels in US states in the three
highest quarters of income inequality, compared with US states in the lowest
quarter.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction, heart 
failure, and pneumonia, exposure to higher levels of income inequality was
associated with increased risk of readmission but not mortality. In view of the
observational design of the study, these findings could be biased, owing to
residual confounding.

PMCID: PMC3573180
PMID: 23412830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Vasc Surg. 2014 Jul;60(1):77-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2014.01.055. Epub 2014 Mar 
20.

Predictors and consequences of unplanned hospital readmission within 30 days of
carotid endarterectomy.

Ho KJ(1), Madenci AL(2), Semel ME(2), McPhee JT(3), Nguyen LL(2), Ozaki CK(2),
Belkin M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Ill.
(2)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, Mass. (3)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Boston Medical
Center, Boston, Mass. (4)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Boston, Mass. Electronic address: mbelkin@partners.org.

Comment in
    J Vasc Surg. 2014 Jul;60(1):83-4.

OBJECTIVE: In the United States, vascular surgeons frequently perform carotid
endarterectomy (CEA). Given the resource burden of unplanned readmission (URA),
we sought to identify the predictors and consequences of URA after this common
vascular surgery procedure to identify potential points of intervention.
METHODS: Using a prospective single-institution database, we retrospectively
identified consecutive patients undergoing CEA (2001-2011). Demographic and
perioperative factors were prospectively collected. The primary end point was
30-day postdischarge URA after CEA. The secondary end point was 1-year survival. 
We performed a univariable analysis for URA followed by a multivariable Cox
model. A Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed for 1-year survival.
RESULTS: During the study period, 840 patients underwent 897 CEAs. The 30-day
postdischarge overall readmission rate and URA rate were 8.6% and 6.5%,
respectively. Most URA patients (n = 42; 73.4%) were readmitted for a CEA-related
reason (headache, cardiac, hypertension, surgical site infection,
bleeding/hematoma, stroke/transient ischemic attack, dysphagia, or hyperperfusion
syndrome). Seventeen patients (29.3%) had more than one reason for URA. Median
time to URA was 4 days (interquartile range, 1-9 days). Postoperative length of
stay, indication for CEA, and discharge destination were not associated with URA.
In multivariable analysis, in-hospital occurrence of congestive heart failure
(hazard ratio [HR], 15.1; 95% confidence interval [CI], 4.7-48.8; P < .001),
stroke (HR, 5.0; 95% CI, 1.8-14.0; P < .001), bleeding/hematoma (HR, 3.1; 95% CI,
1.4-6.9; P = .003), and prior coronary artery bypass grafting (HR, 2.0; 95% CI,
1.2-3.5; P = .01) were significantly associated with URA. Patients in the URA
group also had decreased survival during 1 year (91% vs 96%; P = .01, log-rank).
CONCLUSIONS: The 30-day URA rate after CEA is low (6.5%). Prior coronary artery
bypass grafting and in-hospital postoperative occurrence of stroke,
bleeding/hematoma, and congestive heart failure identify those at increased risk 
of URA, and URA signals increased long-term risk of postoperative mortality.

Copyright © 2014 Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Mosby, Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24657298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012 Sep;144(3):671-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.05.031. Epub 2012 Jun 17.

Early readmission for congestive heart failure predicts late mortality after
cardiac surgery.

Lee R(1), Homer N, Andrei AC, McGee EC, Malaisrie SC, Kansal P, McCarthy PM.

Author information: 
(1)Bluhm Cardiovascular Institute, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
ricklee@nmh.org

OBJECTIVE: Early readmission in patients hospitalized for medical congestive
heart failure is common, expensive, and associated with a worse late survival.
Our objective was to compare late survival in patients' readmission for
congestive heart failure with readmission for other causes in patients undergoing
cardiac surgery.
METHODS: Of 3654 consecutive patients undergoing cardiac surgery at a single
institution between April 2004 and June 2010, 3492 (96%) were discharged from the
hospital before 30 days and analyzed. Survival curves by readmission reason were 
compared using the log-rank test. Multivariable analyses adjusted for patient
demographics, known preoperative cardiac risk factors, and surgical
characteristics.
RESULTS: The readmission rate at 30 days was 13% (465/3492): 23% for
arrhythmias/heart block, 12% for congestive heart failure, 40% for surgery
related causes, 14% for infection, and 11% for noncardiac causes. Independent
risk factors for readmission include age, gender, congestive heart failure, and
cardiopulmonary bypass time. Eight percent (268/3492) of discharged patients died
within the 6-year study: 14% in the readmission group versus 7% in the
nonreadmission group (P < .01). Patients who had been readmitted for congestive
heart failure had worse late survivals compared with all patients who had been
readmitted for causes related to their surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Readmission within 30 days after cardiac surgery for congestive
heart failure predicts late mortality. Targeted postoperative management may be
warranted in patients with surgical congestive heart failure.

Copyright © 2012 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22713305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2013 Mar 1;6(2):171-7. doi:
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.112.967356. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Patient-identified factors related to heart failure readmissions.

Retrum JH(1), Boggs J, Hersh A, Wright L, Main DS, Magid DJ, Allen LA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Affairs, Department of Health and Behavioral Sciences,
University of Colorado-Denver, CO, USA. Jessica.Retrum@ucdenver.edu

BACKGROUND: Although readmission after hospitalization for heart failure has
received increasing attention, little is known about its root causes. Prior
investigations have relied on administrative databases, chart review, and
single-question surveys.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed semistructured 30- to 60-minute interviews of
patients (n=28) readmitted within 6 months of index heart failure admission.
Established qualitative approaches were used to analyze and to interpret data.
Interview findings were the primary focus of the study, but patient information
and provider comments from chart data were also consulted. Patient median age was
61 years; 29% were nonwhite; 50% were married; 32% had preserved ejection
fraction; and median time from discharge to readmission was 31 days. Reasons for 
readmission were multifactorial and not easily categorized into mutually
exclusive reasons. Five themes emerged as reasons cited for hospital readmission:
distressing symptoms, unavoidable progression of illness, influence of
psychosocial factors, good but imperfect self-care adherence, and health system
failures.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides the first systematic qualitative assessment of
patient perspectives concerning heart failure readmission. Contrary to prior
literature and distinct from what we found documented in the medical record,
patient experiences were highly heterogeneous, not easily categorized as
preventable or not preventable, and not easily attributed to a single cause.
These findings suggest that future interventions designed to reduce heart failure
readmissions should be multifaceted, should be systemic in nature, and should
integrate patient input.

PMCID: PMC4082819
PMID: 23386663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Heart. 2014 Sep 15;100(18):1436-43. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2013-305444. Epub 2014 
Jun 9.

Prognosis after a first hospitalisation for acute myocardial infarction and
congestive heart failure by country of birth.

van Oeffelen AA(1), Agyemang C(2), Stronks K(2), Bots ML(1), Vaartjes I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Social Medicine, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate differences in 28-day and 5-year mortality and 5-year
readmission after a first hospitalisation for acute myocardial infarction (AMI)
and congestive heart failure (CHF) between first generation ethnic minority
groups (henceforth, migrants) and the ethnic Dutch population.
METHODS: Nationwide prospective cohorts of first hospitalised AMI (N=213 630) and
CHF patients (N=189 069) between 1998 and 2010 were built. Differences in 28-day 
and 5-year mortality and in 5-year AMI/CHF readmission between migrants
(Surinamese, Moroccan, Turkish, Antillean, Indonesian, Chinese and South Asian)
and the ethnic Dutch population were investigated using Cox proportional hazard
regression models.
RESULTS: After the first AMI hospitalisation, mortality and AMI/CHF readmission
were higher in the majority of migrant groups compared with ethnic Dutch. For
example, HRs (adjusted for age, sex, marital status, degree of urbanisation and
year of event) with 95% CIs among Surinamese (mainly of African or South-Asian
origin) were 1.16 (1.02 to 1.32) for 28-day mortality, 1.44 (1.30 to 1.60) for
5-year mortality, 1.33 (1.08 to 1.63) for AMI readmission and 2.09 (1.82 to 2.40)
for CHF readmission. After a first CHF hospitalisation, mortality rates among
migrants were more diverse, with lower 28-day mortality among Moroccan and
Turkish migrants and higher 5-year mortality among Surinamese, Chinese and South 
Asians. Readmission after CHF was often higher among migrant groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Prognosis after a first AMI hospitalisation was worse among most
migrant groups compared with the ethnic Dutch population. Ethnic inequalities in 
prognosis after a first CHF hospitalisation were more diverse. Efforts should be 
made to disentangle the underlying factors of the results.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24914061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Minerva Cardioangiol. 2013 Aug;61(4):437-49.

B-type natriuretic peptide. Guided vs. conventional care in outpatients with
chronic heart failure: a retrospective study.

De Vecchis R(1), Esposito C, Di Biase G, Ariano C.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Unit, Presidio Sanitario Intermedi, "Elena d'Aosta", Naples, Italy 
- r.de.vecchis@alice.it.

AIM: It is not known whether therapy assisted by determinations of serum B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP) may improve the outcome for outpatients with chronic
heart failure (CHF).
METHODS: A retrospective case-control study was carried out, enrolling patients
with acutely decompensated heart failure (ADHF) who were followed up for a mean
period of four months. The patients who had died or had new episodes of ADHF were
studied as the cases. For each case, one living patient who was free from
ADHF-related re-hospitalisations was recruited as control. Cases and controls
were also matched for some variables to minimise possible confounding. The
possible role of BNP-guided therapy as a predictor of decreased risk of deaths or
new hospitalisations related to heart failure was explored.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight cases and 44 controls were enrolled. A fall in BNP on the
fifth day after admission was found to be a predictor of a decreased risk of the 
composite endpoint "death or new hospitalisation, heart failure-related" (hazard 
ratio=0.1508; 95% CI: 0.049 to 0.463; P=0.001). On the other hand, low glomerular
filtration rate at admission (<60 mL/min/1.73 m2) was associated with increased
risk of the abovementioned endpoint (hazard ratio=7.1785; 95% CI: 1.574 to
32.725; P=0.0113). On the contrary, BNP-guided therapy was associated with a
similar risk of death and/or CHF-related hospitalisation, compared to the
conventional clinical approach.
CONCLUSION: A fall in BNP ≥60% from baseline on the fifth day after admission was
found to be associated with a favorable clinical outcome in outpatients with CHF 
after four months of follow-up, irrespective whether this finding had been
detected in patients treated according to the BNP-guided therapy or in patients
treated with conventional clinical criteria. However, among the outpatients with 
previous ADHF, a substantial improvement in cardiovascular event rates could not 
be demonstrated in those treated with BNP-guided therapy compared with those
undergoing usual, symptom-guided treatment.

PMID: 23846010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. Can J Cardiol. 2008 Jul;24 Suppl B:6B-8B.

Acute decompensated heart failure.

Lepage S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Quebec. serge.lepage@USherbrooke.ca

Acute decompensated heart failure is the most common cause of hospitalization for
patients older than 65 years of age. Although treatment of this condition has
improved over the past two decades, the specific approach to patients in the
acute setting has not evolved in the same way. A patient facing acute
decompensation is experiencing a serious medical condition that is associated
with a poor prognosis. In addition, acute decompensated heart failure results in 
significant costs to the health care system. Significant morbidity and mortality 
are associated with patients who are readmitted within a year of the first
hospitalization. Because of this important problem, further research on improving
the prognosis for this condition is warranted. The present article will focus on 
the risk factors associated with acute decompensation and the importance of this 
condition, both on prognosis and economics.

PMCID: PMC2794441
PMID: 18629381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]




1. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2011 Sep;12(9):611-8. doi: 10.1714/926.10176.

[Major epidemiological changes and clinical variables in patients undergoing a
program of heart rehabilitation after cardiac surgery - MEPHISTOPHELES].

[Article in Italian]

Baravelli M(1), Picozzi A, Rossi A, Cattaneo P, Imperiale D, Rossi MC, Fantoni C,
Vezzaro G, Crespi L, Bosco M, Borghi S, Ballotta A, Menicanti L, Donatelli F,
Gronda E, Anzà C.

Author information: 
(1)U.O.di cardiologia Riabilitativa Specialistica, Istituto Ospedaliero
Multimedica, Castellanza. massimo.baravelli@virgilio.it

BACKGROUND: Recent observational studies show an increase of more complex and
critically ill patients referred to Italian cardiac rehabilitation (CR)
departments; the exact mechanisms underlying this phenomenon, however, have not
been clearly identified. The aim of our study was to evaluate the epidemiological
and clinical changes that occurred over the last decade in patients hospitalized 
in CR departments with high admittance rates.
METHODS: We have retrospectively evaluated all patients admitted between 2002 and
2009 to our division of CR (n = 3340, 1155 female, mean age 66.4 ± 11 years)
after recent cardiac surgery. The study population was divided into two
homogeneous groups: the four-year period 2002-2005, group A (n = 1614, 540
female, mean age 66.1 ± 10 years) and the four-year period 2006-2009, group B (n 
= 1726, 615 female, mean age 67.4 ± 11 years). Data were compared using specific 
indicators of clinical complexity.
RESULTS: Patients aged >75 years were more in group B compared to A (26.3 vs
19.8%, p<0.0001), as well as patients with recent complex surgical interventions,
such as combined coronary artery bypass grafting and heart valve surgery (16.4 vs
10.2%, p<0.0001). An increased incidence of cardiovascular death (1.4 vs 0.6%,
p=0.02), acute coronary syndrome (1.5 vs 0.7%, p=0.02) and persistent atrial
fibrillation/flutter (13.5 vs 7.1%, p<0.0001) was observed in group B, as well as
an increased prevalence of systolic heart failure (18.3 vs 9.0%, p<0.0001).
Similarly, the incidence of acute respiratory failure episodes (1.0 vs 0.4%,
p=0.05), the prevalence of patients admitted with a tracheostomy tube (2.6 vs
0.2%, p<0.0001) and the incidence of acute renal failure (1.1 vs 0.5%, p=0.05)
were significantly increased in group B. Postoperative infections and surgical
wound complications were 4-fold higher in group B (13.9 vs 3.1%, p<0.0001, and
12.8 vs 2.3%, p<0.0001, respectively). Compared to group A, patients of group B
showed a significantly lower physical performance, as expressed by the Rivermead 
motility index (3.8 ± 1.1 vs 5.2 ± 0.8, p<0.001); moreover, the number of
subjects able to perform an incremental training program was significantly lower 
in group B than group A (14.8 vs 60.6%, p<0.0001). Mean hospital stay was longer 
in group B than group A (25.4 ± 13 vs 22.1 ± 9 days, p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study, by collecting data from a CR division in northern Italy
with high admittance rates, demonstrates a dramatic increase in clinical
complexity over the last few years. This points to the need for new expertise and
major resources to be allocated to CR departments.

PMID: 21892223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



